[Amit Varma]: What's in front of me right now? It's a microphone. I can see it clearly. There's also a laptop
[Amit Varma]: in front of me. I can see that clearly as well. It's not a horse. Acer does not make
[Amit Varma]: horses. The laptop is on a table. The table is on the floor. The floor is in a box in
[Amit Varma]: the sky in a city that people call Mumbai. There are many boxes in the sky. And sometimes
[Amit Varma]: I walk out of my box and meet friends who have stepped outside of their boxes to meet
[Amit Varma]: me. And then we find all of us live in different cities in different worlds. And the certainties
[Amit Varma]: that I can embrace about mics and laptops and tables cannot extend to the outside world.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is complicated. The universe contains multitudes. As this earth rotates and revolves,
[Amit Varma]: my head begins to spin. I want certainties. So I start building them about the world around
[Amit Varma]: me. Soon, I have a story to explain everything. The world makes sense again. You also might
[Amit Varma]: have a story that explains everything. And if I find your story is not the same as mine,
[Amit Varma]: I can say that you are wrong. I can say that you are evil. And thus comfortable in our
[Amit Varma]: certainties, we can lose the comfort of friends. My point here is this, the world is difficult
[Amit Varma]: to make sense of. And it is tempting to fall for a story that offers certainties. This
[Amit Varma]: could be religion, this could be ideology, this could be a conspiracy theory about the
[Amit Varma]: seen and the unseen being a plot to take over the world. And even for a writer and ex journalist
[Amit Varma]: like me, it's tempting to say, stop thinking boss, too much effort, order the seafood platter,
[Amit Varma]: get the pina colada. I think we all have that urge, don't we? As the famous lines from Kashi
[Amit Varma]: Kashi go, bhaar mein jaye duniya, hum bhajaye harmoniya. That's why it's so important to
[Amit Varma]: seek out questions instead of answers. That's what I try to do on the show. And so does
[Unknown]: my guest today. Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics
[Amit Varma]: and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is the outstanding journalist Rukmini
[Amit Varma]: S, who was on the show in October 2020, to talk about her pioneering data journalism,
[Amit Varma]: as well as her teenage years in a rock band. After that episode, Rukmini went on to write
[Amit Varma]: a book called Whole Numbers and Half Truths, which uses rigorous data to take a good hard
[Amit Varma]: look at our multitudes. The chapter titles themselves indicate the sweep of the book,
[Amit Varma]: what India thinks, feels and believes, how India really votes, how India works, how India
[Amit Varma]: is growing and aging, and so on. What makes this book so enlightening is her approach.
[Amit Varma]: She gets into every issue without preconceptions or biases. She's open to letting the data
[Amit Varma]: speak for itself, even when it indicates patterns that make her uncomfortable. The result is
[Amit Varma]: a book that contains many truths that seem counterintuitive to us, that fly in the face
[Amit Varma]: of received wisdom. The episode I released a couple of weeks ago with Shreyana Bhattacharya
[Amit Varma]: on the loneliness of the Indian woman was full of insights that made me stop and think.
[Amit Varma]: So is this conversation. For example, until I recorded with Rukmini, I did not know that
[Amit Varma]: 98% of the sexual violence committed against women in India is legal. 98%. There's a lot
[Amit Varma]: else in her work that will surprise you and perhaps alarm you about India. But one thing
[Amit Varma]: that does make me optimistic is that there are still journalists like Rukmini around
[Amit Varma]: who are questioning everything, searching for truth, trying to go deep. Before we get
[Amit Varma]: to this conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade. This helped
[Amit Varma]: me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little
[Amit Varma]: better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called FutureStack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. FutureStack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees 2,500
[Amit Varma]: if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Rukmini, welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me Amit.
[Amit Varma]: We are recording this on December 24. And one of my favorite writers and essayist Joan
[Amit Varma]: Didion died today. And I was just revisiting some of her work. And there's a beautiful
[Amit Varma]: passage from her work, The White Album, which resonates with what even we are going to talk
[Amit Varma]: about. So I just want to read that bit out.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, we tell ourselves stories in order to live. The princess is caged in the consulate.
[Amit Varma]: The man with the candy will lead the children into the sea. The naked woman on the ledge
[Amit Varma]: outside the window on the 16th floor is a victim of accident, or the naked woman is
[Amit Varma]: an exhibitionist. And it would be interesting to know which. We tell ourselves that it makes
[Amit Varma]: some difference whether the naked woman is about to commit a mortal sin, or is about
[Amit Varma]: to register a political protest, or is about to be the aristophanic view snatched back
[Amit Varma]: to the human condition by the fireman in priest's clothing just visible in the window behind
[Amit Varma]: her, the one smiling at the telephoto lens. We look for the sermon in the suicide, for
[Amit Varma]: the social or moral lesson in the murder of five. We interpret what we see, select the
[Amit Varma]: most workable of the multiple choices. We live entirely, especially if we are writers,
[Amit Varma]: by the imposition of a narrative line upon disparate images, by the ideas with which
[Amit Varma]: we have learned to freeze the shifting phantasmagoria, which is our actual experience. Or at least
[Amit Varma]: we do for a while. I am talking here about a time when I began to doubt the premises
[Amit Varma]: of all the stories I had ever told myself, a common condition, but one I found troubling.
[Amit Varma]: Stop code. This is from the White Album. And she goes on, of course, to move into a personal
[Amit Varma]: narrative about her own journeys and her own self doubts. But in a sense, this is really,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me the theme of much of your work, that we tell ourselves stories not just in
[Amit Varma]: order to live, but also to kind of make sense of the world. And we do that in order to live,
[Amit Varma]: of course. And what a lot of your work is based on is kind of examining these stories,
[Amit Varma]: not just from a point of view of data or numbers or whatever, but just looking a little deeper
[Amit Varma]: examining sort of all of these stories and going deeper than so do you, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: you look back on yourself, say over the last 15 years, or since you started your journey
[Amit Varma]: in journalism, how different is your view of the world? Like, are there any significant
[Amit Varma]: stories that for you are completely different today? You know, take me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: that, like, would you be a different person if you were not in the business of going deep
[Amit Varma]: into stories if you were, you know, if you were a banker or an engineer, or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: someone who fed coffee into a civet cat to make it shit, or something we were discussing
[Amit Varma]: a while back? Would you kind of be a different person? How have you changed?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, just the question has made me go back a bit and think about these things.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think I was the sort of person who would annoy me now in terms of my absolute
[Guest]: certainty about things that I had read so little about, experienced so little, talked
[Guest]: to such few people about. And I see, I think part of the reason that I don't necessarily
[Guest]: feel angry with people who hold, I mean, I feel angry with people who hold some sorts
[Guest]: of views, but not angry with everyone's certainty, is because I see where mine came from as well.
[Guest]: And it did come from a position of, of sincerity in a way that, you know, feeling very, you
[Guest]: know, where the passion comes first, and then the sort of the meat to it comes later. And
[Guest]: what I would hope is that as the came to it, I changed those positions. And maybe not,
[Guest]: not everyone always feels that way. But yeah, I really do think that a lot of the last few
[Guest]: years, for me, it has been important to, and I don't think of it as a mission in terms
[Guest]: of challenging narratives, or challenging my own assumptions or other people's deeply
[Guest]: held assumptions. But I do think that that is the way you see things unravel. And again,
[Guest]: unravel is not even, you just see all of those elements to it. And it's really become the
[Guest]: only thing of interest, which is absolute certainty around established positions has
[Guest]: just lost a lot of appeal for me. But, you know, if I was doing something else, I would
[Guest]: hope that I would have been at the same place that I am now in terms of having these questions
[Guest]: both around my beliefs and others. And, you know, I remember talking about this to you
[Guest]: the last time I was here, is that for me, these questions came from having come to quote
[Guest]: unquote, standard leftist positions far before I had any experience of the world or even
[Guest]: had had the opportunity to have those positions challenged. They were delivered to me by people
[Guest]: I admired so greatly, that I hadn't even gone through the intellectual journey that they
[Guest]: had gone through to take, I just received it with pleasure from them. And yeah, it,
[Guest]: it took a lot of, I can't, I can't pinpoint what it is that led me to question some of
[Guest]: those things. Even, even now, you know, even in the last two years, I've again found that
[Guest]: so many of the questions around COVID don't fit into easy narratives. You know, it's hard
[Guest]: to say, we were talking earlier about lockdowns. And I feel, I feel that too, I really could
[Guest]: argue things both ways. I feel that even in terms of just the numerical aspect, in the
[Guest]: early days, especially of the pandemic, of thinking about infection fatality rates, and
[Guest]: how, since obviously, that's a low number for COVID, what that should make you feel
[Guest]: about our response, what's adequate, what's not. And I suppose the comforting part is
[Guest]: that people who even hold the, say, a particular leftist position, hold it very dearly and
[Guest]: would not agree broadly with, with the sort of unravelling that I have had. The ones who
[Guest]: really think deeply and who I continue to admire, can see this questioning, you know,
[Guest]: they can, they can come along on part of the journey with you, at least, even if they may
[Guest]: not end up in the same place. So I speak often to Jean Drez, for example, who I admire greatly.
[Guest]: And I would not say that he and I hold the same position. And you know, I'm saying he
[Guest]: and I as if we're sort of buddies or equals. And that's, that's not how I think of it.
[Guest]: But I still think that he and I, he would be, he would hear me out in the sort of questions
[Guest]: I have about these things. It's not doctrinaire in that respect. So yeah, I would, I would
[Guest]: hope that even if I was doing something else, I would have had the same feeling in the last
[Guest]: few years of not wanting to just receive things in this way. And in an odd way, one of the
[Guest]: reasons that's one of the sort of strands of thinking around this is, and one of my
[Guest]: frustrations with journalism was a lack of the absence of creativity, like they didn't,
[Guest]: I couldn't, there wasn't enough beauty, there wasn't enough creativity, there weren't, there
[Guest]: wasn't enough like flights of whimsy. And, and I think part of this questioning has come
[Guest]: from there, that these, these sorts of certainties also lend themselves to a very, it's a bleak
[Guest]: view of humanity, you know, to think that we are all on these pre-decided or fixed paths
[Guest]: and we just choose whether we're going to, you know, Jogeshwari West or East, you know,
[Guest]: that's almost how it, it begins to seem. So I think that that's something that came along
[Guest]: with it, a search for, a search for sort of more detail, but also more creativity. And
[Guest]: you know, this is something that I still don't feel that I get across well enough in my journalism
[Guest]: and I can't instantly think of someone else who does it either, but you cannot have an
[Guest]: uninteresting conversation with most people, right? It's very hard, especially with strangers
[Guest]: when you just have snippets of conversation, like the vast majority of things people say
[Guest]: are very interesting, especially about their own lives. And the fact that so little of
[Guest]: journalism reflects that is such a tragedy. So, so part of this is that, which is that
[Guest]: if I was doing election reporting and I had to talk to someone who quote unquote subscribe
[Guest]: to one political party or the other, and then maybe I'd take those two quotes and put it
[Guest]: into my story and be like, this is how, you know, whatever Jats in this constituency say
[Guest]: they're going to vote. And then I'm sure once I put my pen away, I would have such a complex
[Guest]: and interesting and funny conversation with the person. And then, you know, you, you don't
[Guest]: know what you're going to do with it in your journalism or what it's going to do. So talking
[Guest]: just talking to people and finding that so much of what they said didn't end up fitting
[Guest]: into what I was writing is also part of this pushback against narratives. That's partly
[Guest]: where it comes from. And yes, the feeling that the more that I look at nationally representative
[Guest]: data, the more I realise that some of these dearly held beliefs are actually not grounded
[Guest]: in the broader Indian reality at all. But then of course, there are also sort of certainties
[Guest]: in the data that, that themselves need to be poked at because certainties around say
[Guest]: how Indians vote, which is something that a lot of people come at through the data,
[Guest]: not just through being on the ground, are also so much grounded in poorly asked questions,
[Guest]: instant judgments based on single line answers. It's a quest and I don't think, and I think
[Guest]: that data complicates it in a good way, but I don't think either that data is what's going
[Guest]: to, it's not going to stop with the data either, because there's a lot to ask of the data too.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, something that I've been thinking about for maybe just over a year pretty seriously
[Amit Varma]: is this interesting framework, which, you know, when it first came to me more than a
[Amit Varma]: year ago, I started applying it to various things and tell me what you think about it.
[Amit Varma]: I've spoken about it on the show a few times. And this was when I was doing my episode with
[Amit Varma]: Anshul Malhotra, who's written that lovely book on partition. And at one point, she spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how when she was sitting in Lahore or Karachi, one of those places, and she's talking
[Amit Varma]: with the family, they're remembering partition, the horrors of partition, and they're fulminating
[Amit Varma]: against the Hindus and Hindus are this and Hindus are that. And at one point, they noticed
[Amit Varma]: that she is there and they say, tum nahi beti, tum toh theek ho, but Hindus are like that.
[Amit Varma]: And throughout that conversation, and many others that followed, one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: I realized is that it's important to distinguish between the abstract and the concrete. Like
[Amit Varma]: my sense is that when we encounter things in the concrete, we look at them differently
[Amit Varma]: from when we encounter them in the abstract, like in the abstract, we learn to hate because
[Amit Varma]: abstract notions like nationalism and the Hindu nation or a certain kind of pride and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, I think can be really toxic, because we stop thinking of people as people
[Amit Varma]: we're thinking in these abstract terms. But when we encounter, say, Muslim friends, or
[Amit Varma]: we go to a friend's house to have biryani and all of that, and I'm just taking one example
[Amit Varma]: of a perpetrated Hindu bigot, but it really cuts across anything that in the concrete,
[Amit Varma]: we respond to it differently. And what strikes me here is that I think that also therefore
[Amit Varma]: becomes a challenge for a journalist. Because on the one hand, you have these larger narratives,
[Amit Varma]: which are kind of abstract, like, you know, you've spoken in your book eloquently about
[Amit Varma]: how thinking of something as a vote bank can sometimes be too simplistic, but it's an abstract
[Amit Varma]: narrative. So and so is a vote bank, they are with so and so party, they vote this way,
[Amit Varma]: or this is going to be anti incumbency. And all of these are kind of broad, abstract statements,
[Amit Varma]: which may, you know, which may capture a part of the truth, but when they purport to be
[Amit Varma]: the whole truth, obviously, they're not. And what you also mentioned about interesting
[Amit Varma]: conversations is that then you're getting concrete in those conversations. How was your
[Amit Varma]: day? What did you eat for breakfast? Where did you go to school? You know, and I love
[Amit Varma]: having conversations with people because one of the points that I remember I used to make
[Amit Varma]: in my podcasting course also was that every single human being in this world knows something
[Amit Varma]: you don't, every conversation can be interesting, and we don't get enough of this. And this
[Amit Varma]: is also a challenge in journalism that of course, sometimes you go with a pre decided
[Amit Varma]: narrative and you're, you know, you just you're a slave to that narrative, all your conversations
[Amit Varma]: are in service of that narrative. The people you're speaking to are instrumental for that
[Amit Varma]: purpose, you're not sitting back and just looking at them as what they are. So first,
[Amit Varma]: what do you feel about the concrete, abstract distinction? And to how do you navigate the
[Amit Varma]: trade offs that this represents, like on the one hand, the big picture does matter, you
[Amit Varma]: do need to step back, you do need to look at larger data and what it tells you. But
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand, that data only comes alive when you're actually speaking with real people
[Guest]: with real stories. So you really got the heart of two of the things that I, you know, worry
[Guest]: and puzzle about the most in sort of slightly tangential ways to what you've mentioned.
[Guest]: So about the issue of the concrete versus the abstract, and the reason I think about
[Guest]: this a lot is because then it leads me to think about, then do these experiences in
[Guest]: the concrete have the potential of changing views in the abstract. And this is something
[Guest]: that I'm coming around to feeling is not actually as significant in changing views that I would
[Guest]: have hoped it would be. And you know, it's funny, the example that you gave as well,
[Guest]: which is that, I think it's precisely that sort of belief about the fundamental nature
[Guest]: of Indian attitudes to religion in particular, that we have, in a way, come to hold here,
[Guest]: which is that people say these sort of things, but then, you know, if they were your neighbor
[Guest]: and something happened, and they would actually help you and, and, you know, when you take
[Guest]: it to a broader view, it is in a sense, something that was put forward in a Pew research survey
[Guest]: about a year ago around religious tolerance in India. And their sort of broad thesis was
[Guest]: that Indians may be, you know, they're quite live and let live in a broader way, but in
[Guest]: their personal lives, these boundaries are not drawn tightly. And I think in a way, this
[Guest]: is somewhat has been something of a liberal fantasy of how religion operates in India,
[Guest]: which is that people may hold these beliefs, or they, you know, talk about it like this,
[Guest]: but in their real lives, they would not necessarily behave like this about, you know, another
[Guest]: person. And I'm beginning to feel that that's not actually true, because I don't feel like
[Guest]: I see adequate evidence that, that even in this broader, broadly held way, people do
[Guest]: hold these tolerant beliefs. So, I felt after that same Pew report, when I finished reading
[Guest]: it, my feeling was, Indians are universally intolerant in the personal sphere, in the
[Guest]: public sphere, across the board. And I didn't actually agree with the narrative that the,
[Guest]: you know, by just putting it as their headline in their press release, that Pew decided,
[Guest]: and then I saw sort of repeatedly repeated across all news coverage and all discussions
[Guest]: around it, because in a way, I felt like it confirmed what many of us like to feel about
[Guest]: the country. So, it's entirely possible that when people get into the concrete and encounter
[Guest]: actual people, they might behave differently. But I don't have that much faith anymore,
[Guest]: that that has the potential of changing the abstract. And ultimately, if the abstract
[Guest]: is what decides who you vote, or in a moment of sort of mob frenzy, how you behave, who
[Guest]: you marry, all of that, then, then sort of fleeting moments in the concrete may just
[Guest]: be that, right? Like fleeting encounters or fleeting moments. So, I worry about that stage
[Guest]: of the loop, how the concrete affects the abstract.
[Guest]: And the second part that you mentioned, you know, about, especially when you deal with
[Guest]: it in your journalism, which is, you can't run away from these narratives, but you also
[Guest]: want to, want to encounter the, much more of people than, than you can when you, when
[Guest]: you do your reporting. Yeah, I think there's been a real narrowing of imagination in how
[Guest]: journalism is done. And that, if you've decided that there's only one way that the story can
[Guest]: be told, or only one way that you're going to tell the story and no other, and not do
[Guest]: anything with all of these conversations that you've had, then, then that leaves you in
[Guest]: this poor space of having to turn people into archetypes, really, you know, rather than
[Guest]: all the other things they've said. And so, I have a story in the book, for example, about
[Guest]: this man who accompanied me, a Hindi newspaper journalist who accompanied me on a reporting
[Guest]: trip. And, you know, not to get into all of the details of it, but he sort of displayed
[Guest]: a casteist behaviour on that trip to the person we were speaking to, you know, outright untouchability
[Guest]: in terms of not accepting tea from the person's house. So, even in the telling of that, he
[Guest]: could come to represent a certain sort of archetype, which is this upper caste Hindu
[Guest]: male, North Indian male, who's practicing untouchability. Then the, what happened next
[Guest]: then though, is that he took me to his house because he wanted to demonstrate to his young
[Guest]: daughter, his college going daughter, that here is a woman who's come all the way from
[Guest]: Delhi. So, he did have that too. He wanted to show his daughter, a woman who was travelling
[Guest]: by herself on work. So, even in that, slotting him into one sort of archetype would have
[Guest]: been reductive. He had those beliefs, he had other sorts of beliefs. And, and I don't,
[Guest]: I mean, luckily that wasn't what I was reporting on. But if I was, I don't know, you know,
[Guest]: if I would have been forced to sort of slot him into one category or the other. But I
[Guest]: think when you're writing with data as well, this becomes particularly problematic. And
[Guest]: honestly, this is the biggest challenge that I have with doing the sort of journalism I
[Guest]: do and I encountered it in the writing of the book as well, which is that I find this
[Guest]: trope of taking one person's story and then broadening out to the data very tiresome.
[Guest]: It's not just because it's cliched and, you know, it becomes sort of the only way you,
[Guest]: you're told that the only way into a data story is if you start with a person. And I
[Guest]: never like to assume these things about readers. And maybe that's not how every story has to
[Guest]: be told. So, it's a tiresome trope. But it also means that in a way you're not really
[Guest]: doing justice to the principle behind which you're, you're doing data journalism, right?
[Guest]: Like the idea is that, that maybe individuals speak in different ways, but this is what
[Guest]: the overall mean or the median of what you're talking about is saying. And then if you're
[Guest]: picking out this one individual, who, who are you choosing? Are you choosing the person
[Guest]: in the bottom half of the distribution? And you're saying they fit into what the median
[Guest]: is showing? Are you going to pick an outlier to say that they are the outlier? These decisions
[Guest]: then complicate the act of data journalism itself. And I struggled with it in the writing
[Guest]: of the book, because I do know that I enjoy stories. I like talking to people and I wanted
[Guest]: to put these in. And anyone from any sort of background, whether a data background or
[Guest]: not, in their responses to me about the book has talked about the stories that have stayed
[Guest]: with them. That yes, the data is the part that, you know, shook them or was a piece
[Guest]: of information they retained. But the things, the stories people wanted me to talk more
[Guest]: about or the parts they want me to read out are always the human stories. So that was
[Guest]: the right choice in a right sort of storytelling choice, because it did stick with people.
[Guest]: And I know how much I enjoyed that as well. But I absolutely do not have the right answer
[Guest]: of whether that is the best way to do data journalism or not, because in a way, it's
[Guest]: not staying true to the data. And in fact, the single story that has, you know, most
[Guest]: people have come up to me with is the story of a young man named Nitin Kamble in the book.
[Guest]: And in the section that I'm talking about love and marriage, and he's in an inter-caste
[Guest]: relationship. And then at the end of the chapter, when I take the data to him and I show him
[Guest]: how uncommon inter-caste marriage is, and I ask him if it makes him feel like an outlier,
[Guest]: he says, you know, the reason I got talking to him about it, because I have an inter-caste
[Guest]: marriage too. So I said, you know, that tiny percentage, that's where I am. So do you see
[Guest]: how small that is? And how, what does that make you feel like? And he said, well, that's
[Guest]: data about marriage. That's not about love. And he said, if you ask people about love,
[Guest]: I feel a lot of people do have these inter-caste relationships, but they get thwarted because,
[Guest]: you know, we can't leave our families ultimately. And I think he meant it as much about the
[Guest]: girl that he was worried was going to leave him as for himself. So in a way it undermines
[Guest]: my data, right? Because my data is saying this about inter-caste marriage. But if I'm
[Guest]: saying that there are all these inter-caste relationships, but aren't reflected in, then
[Guest]: what am I saying? Am I saying that there is a lot of inter-caste love? I don't know. I
[Guest]: don't have the data for it. So it's, it's a story that has stuck with so many people
[Guest]: and I really enjoy talking to him as well. But it undermines the point in a way, in,
[Guest]: if I was sort of trying to convince someone or if it was an academic paper, I'm undermining
[Guest]: my own point with it. So yeah, I don't, I really don't know if, if this is the best,
[Guest]: most honest, most accurate way of doing data journalism at all.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't mean these two aspects as something that have to be reconciled. I think they can
[Amit Varma]: be orthogonal to each other that you can look at the big picture, but you can also dive
[Amit Varma]: down and kind of make it human in different ways. And that story about the gentleman who
[Amit Varma]: didn't want to have a cup of tea also struck me. I mean, he didn't want to have a cup of
[Amit Varma]: tea because of caste, but you realized it was just an excuse where he said he wanted
[Amit Varma]: to eat something after you had left. And you told the story to his daughter when you went
[Amit Varma]: home and the daughter said, you know, at least I hope you said it's because you're fasting,
[Amit Varma]: which also, you know, speaks to her perceptiveness of the situation. And also there is an implied
[Amit Varma]: sort of disapproval there. And in fact, this is, you know, while reading your chapter,
[Amit Varma]: and this was, of course, in the second chapter, What India Thinks, Feels and Believes, where
[Amit Varma]: you speak about how the lived reality of people is, you know, doesn't embody the sort of tolerance
[Amit Varma]: that people and this will just be opposite of what I was saying, in a sense, where it
[Amit Varma]: is the abstract, which is nice, you're saying nice things in the abstract, or we believe
[Amit Varma]: in tolerance, we should all live together. But in their concrete everyday lives, it's
[Amit Varma]: kind of very different. And they have all these terrible stereotypical notions of each
[Amit Varma]: other. And just thinking aloud, one thing that I would like to see more of, I think
[Amit Varma]: within the creator universe, I don't even know if it's journalism's job, but just within
[Amit Varma]: the creators universes, more of these stories of the real textures of real lives of real
[Amit Varma]: people. I think a lot of what we see on social media is posturing a lot of what we see in
[Amit Varma]: journalism is, you know, narratives that are pre decided, and that can only go so deep,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of what we see in the creator economy is constructed, but more and more, there is
[Amit Varma]: space for much more authentic content. So I'm just throwing this thought out there for
[Amit Varma]: creators. Now, before we actually start talking about the book and all the things that you've
[Amit Varma]: discovered, many of which in fact, challenge my beliefs like this, in fact, like, I always
[Amit Varma]: said everything you say about India, the opposite is always true, that old cliche, right. And
[Amit Varma]: so of course, we are deeply illiberal in many ways, gender, caste, and so on. But I remember
[Amit Varma]: saying this once to JP Narayan in an episode I did with him, episode 149. And he said,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, if you look at it another way, we're also extremely liberal, in terms of
[Amit Varma]: look at our food, look at our clothes, look at the way we live our everyday lives and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And your data makes me question that a little bit more, that yeah, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we are liberal in all of these other inanimate things like food and language and so on. But
[Amit Varma]: the people aren't really all that liberal. But before we get there, you know, let's talk
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about the book. Like, how did you conceive of the book? You know, did you
[Amit Varma]: feel that the book needed to be written in the sense that there are so many flawed beliefs
[Amit Varma]: out there? There are so many people on TV channels purporting to be experts, not exports,
[Amit Varma]: the one wishes ever exports. And there are so many sort of false narratives that people
[Amit Varma]: just believe and it's all over WhatsApp, or they're convenient to believe in all that.
[Amit Varma]: So did you have the idea of this book for a long time? Or did it start coming to you
[Amit Varma]: when you, you know, decided what you want to write about? How did it all happen?
[Guest]: I absolutely did not have a book in me at all. Because, you know, as you know, I'm a
[Guest]: sort of regular news reporter and I do a fair amount of it. And so I didn't even have this
[Guest]: sort of sitting back and thinking about whether I had a bigger story to tell. I very much
[Guest]: did not have a book in me. Sometime last year, I had to send Pratap Bhanu Mehta a bunch of
[Guest]: articles for something I was doing. And he read them all. And then he said to me, you
[Guest]: know what, you should put these together and it would make a book. And he actually said,
[Guest]: you should have one chapter that's on how people vote and one on how, you know, the
[Guest]: idea of having it as you so it's really, it's his idea. I've said as much to him as well.
[Guest]: And then I thought, yeah, okay, I do have all of these things that I've been writing
[Guest]: over time. And I did not come at it from a sort of myth busting or fact checking place
[Guest]: at all. More of a place, if there was any of that, it was in terms of wanting to put
[Guest]: out things that by now should have been institutional knowledge instead of exhuming them every time
[Guest]: a news event came up. Like just, you know, the numbers and I feel sort of vindicated
[Guest]: in that because of how much this chapter two has surprised people. Anyone who wants to
[Guest]: do, you know, a news story around it invariably picks that chapter to want to talk to me about.
[Guest]: And I actually felt that I had seen this so many times I had done, I had reported, you
[Guest]: know, there are maybe seven or eight surveys referenced in that chapter. And I have written
[Guest]: on all of them and they came out and they all said the same thing. Yet that sort of
[Guest]: institutional knowledge that this is the state of what we know now about people's thoughts
[Guest]: and beliefs from decent data that had not happened. So more in terms of these things
[Guest]: that I keep pulling out, let me put them all together and in one place only in terms of
[Guest]: that. And I suppose some of the things that have surprised people, I didn't even know
[Guest]: that they would. This part about, I'm so surprised, honestly, that the inter-caste marriage part
[Guest]: surprises people so much. I would have, if it came up in like, you know, some of these
[Guest]: things, especially when you're in a newsroom, someone will make some comment and then they'll
[Guest]: be like, hey, fish out the data and do a piece. If I was in that place right now, I mean like,
[Guest]: I'm not going to do it. I've said it too many times. Everybody knows it. That's what I feel
[Guest]: about the state of data around inter-caste marriage. So clearly my instincts on those
[Guest]: are quite wrong. I thought it had been said ad nauseum. And then, so I ended up, I had
[Guest]: a great conversation with Kartika, the publisher at Westland, who's a really, really kind and
[Guest]: wonderful person. And she was, you know, interested in the idea, excited about it. But this was,
[Guest]: this trip I took to Delhi was in March 2020. And by the time I came back, I, on the flight
[Guest]: back, I was one of maybe two or three people wearing masks then, because I had begun to
[Guest]: see the news. And then maybe a wee, 10 days later was lockdown. And, you know, we spoke
[Guest]: while we were all under lockdown then, a slightly more relaxed stage of lockdown, but at home
[Guest]: with two kids and also doing a lot of news reporting then, I didn't work on the book
[Guest]: idea at all. And it really sort of went out of my mind. And, and I've told you this already.
[Guest]: So I'm not saying this just because I'm on the podcast. But when you're that sort of
[Guest]: snowed under both with kids and with work, you stop taking your own ideas very seriously,
[Guest]: or yourself very seriously. I don't think I've had a four hour conversation with my
[Guest]: husband in the last few years, because our kids interrupt us every 30 seconds. So I told
[Guest]: you this then, which is that having that coming on your podcast, not just, you know, the flattering
[Guest]: feeling that someone's taking your idea seriously, but also to know that you do have some theories
[Guest]: about the world, because I don't anymore, you know, when I was in Delhi, we were working
[Guest]: journalists, you'd go out to dinner, and you were all talking about the state of the world.
[Guest]: And so you felt like you had theories, but when you stop putting them in words, and they're
[Guest]: just running around in your mind, and all your words are around, you know, going to
[Guest]: the beach or Peppa Pig or whatever, you start, you don't feel like you have theories anymore
[Guest]: about the world. I feel like coming on your podcast then reminded me that I did have things
[Guest]: to say, I did have a point of view, I did have things I wanted to say. So I restarted
[Guest]: working on it then. And then it was all pretty fast, because that was the, I started working
[Guest]: on it in the end of 2020, and was sort of done by the summer of it, summer of 2021.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's, and you know, that's really how, because one sort of Pratap had put it
[Guest]: in this way to me, which again, I thought was very useful, because I'm not sure I would
[Guest]: have thought of it in terms of 10 things that I want to say and structure things and, you
[Guest]: know, the data under it. Then that came out, that, you know, happened quite easily. And
[Guest]: again, because of my training as a journalist, I'm sort of used to writing 1000 words on
[Guest]: something, you know, at a couple of hours notice, I've been doing it for 15 years now.
[Guest]: And I had all of these things that I had filed away, you know, even the story, some of these
[Guest]: are people I got in touch with, and sort of that pyramiding kind of effect to get to stories
[Guest]: that you end up using. But so many of these were little bits of information that I had
[Guest]: just picked up while reporting over the years. And those were not the points of the reporting
[Guest]: assignment then, but the sort of side things that never made it to the news story, added
[Guest]: up to a picture of India that I was trying to get through, you know, just funnily enough,
[Guest]: in my way here, I was just, I love Bombay. And I haven't lived here for a long time.
[Guest]: I love it. I would, I would, my favorite city to have lived in, as you can see, by the way,
[Guest]: I can't stop staring out of the window. And the last house I lived in was in Loa Parel
[Guest]: and it was, it was still 2008. So it wasn't the city that it looks like right now. But
[Guest]: we lived, me and two friends, we lived in a sort of modernized Saar behind the, I think
[Guest]: Grand Maratha, the ITC hotel then. So as you can imagine, it was the most sort of mixed
[Guest]: up piece of architecture, geography, all of that politics. And so all the way here, I
[Guest]: was sort of, you know, looking out of the window of the taxi and trying to think of
[Guest]: what if it was, what if it resembled the city I lived in then, and how much of it would
[Guest]: be new and what came up when. And I was thinking of a reporting trip I did once. And see, the
[Guest]: assignment to me was Bombay's bar, dance bars were closing. So, because the then Home Minister
[Guest]: RR Patil had decided that in a sort of moral clamp down, they were not. So I was sent out
[Guest]: to do a, go to a bunch of bars, dance bars and do a story that night. And I don't know,
[Guest]: I can't remember what I wrote then, but it was probably pretty staid, you know, spoke
[Guest]: to some of the girls there. But, but as it happened, I went on that reporting assignment
[Guest]: the night before my birthday. And at one of the dance bars, they were playing, I don't
[Guest]: know, I can't even remember what the music was then at all. But let's say, what is that?
[Guest]: Munni Badnaam Hui or something. That was the vibe. And so the song was playing and then
[Guest]: suddenly it pauses. And then the song that comes over and all of the girls stop dancing.
[Guest]: And then the song that comes over is, it's a hap, hap, happy birthday. They were playing
[Guest]: happy birthday to me in the middle of the dance bar because someone had told them that
[Guest]: the next day was my, I had gone with a couple of people, that the next day was my birthday.
[Guest]: It was just such a hilarious and surreal scene. I still remember the, the sort of disco lights
[Guest]: that were on then. And where, where would I have slotted this into any story? And the
[Guest]: other thing that I remember then is that, because, you know, my assignment was to talk
[Guest]: to the girls. So I did get chatting with them and went back into their little dressing room
[Guest]: areas. And one thing any woman will tell you is a annoying thing about traveling in public
[Guest]: transport in India is that other women sometimes do moral policing about your clothes. And
[Guest]: not moral policing, it comes out of a place of concern, I should say that. But if you're
[Guest]: wearing a sleeveless top and if another woman sees your bra strap sticking out, rather than
[Guest]: say anything, they'll tuck it in for you. This happens all the time. Every woman listening
[Guest]: will know this has happened to them. So I was talking to one of these girls who was
[Guest]: like in the briefest choli possible. And while she's talking to me, she casually tucks my
[Guest]: bra strap in. And the whole thing just, it just amused me so much. All of the, all of
[Guest]: the dynamics of sort of power relations or hierarchies that you could have imagined were
[Guest]: all so much more complicated. And I was just thinking none of this made it to my piece
[Guest]: and what would I have I even done with it? But, but it's all sort of added up to what
[Guest]: I think of Bombay because when I was driving by, I was seeing a sort of dive bar, not a
[Guest]: dance bar. But yeah, it immediately took me back to just that tinny, it's a hap, hap,
[Guest]: hap, tinny bar. Yeah, so, so cinematic, these memories, actually. Yeah. And at the end of
[Guest]: the night, the person who was taking us around, who was a friend of a corporator, took us
[Guest]: to a restaurant in Mahim because everything was shut by then and the shutters had to be
[Guest]: pulled up and you could just scooch through and there was, you know, a late night meal
[Guest]: to eat. And I had spent the whole evening with this person. And then as we sat down
[Guest]: at the table, he pulled a gun out of his pocket and put it on the table. He'd been, he'd had
[Guest]: a gun in his pocket the whole night and I hadn't even known it. So yeah, as cinematic
[Amit Varma]: as it gets.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fabulous. And by the way, in case people are wondering why, why you mentioned looking
[Amit Varma]: out of my window, we are on the 27th floor and my curtain was closed because they're
[Amit Varma]: thick sound dampening curtains. But look, when he said no, I want to look out and it
[Amit Varma]: probably won't affect the sound because it's in a different direction. So the windows are
[Amit Varma]: open right now. And you mentioned the dance bars. So in those days, one of my very dear
[Amit Varma]: friends, Sonia Falero, was working on a book about dance bars called Beautiful Thing. And
[Amit Varma]: I was lucky enough to be able to have an inside view on a whole writing process. And she did
[Amit Varma]: some four or five drafts of the book. And the one thing that struck me, in fact, the
[Amit Varma]: one thing that blew me away, and I discussed it with her when I did an episode with her
[Amit Varma]: last year on her latest book, The Good Girls, which is also fabulous, was that each of those
[Amit Varma]: drafts is completely different, completely different top to bottom. It's not as if paras
[Amit Varma]: have been moved, moved around small structural changes, typos have been removed. She just
[Amit Varma]: wrote them all from scratch. Sometimes the main character in one was a side character
[Amit Varma]: and another, but she had that kind of discipline and the process to do it and it took her years,
[Amit Varma]: but she did it. The similar process which she went through with The Good Girls, which
[Amit Varma]: again, she wrote from scratch. And I want to ask you about your process now. Like many
[Amit Varma]: years back, this book came out by Mason Curry called Daily Rituals, where Curry basically
[Amit Varma]: looked at artists and authors and spoke about their rituals and their workflows and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. And but he copped a lot of flack for that book, because there weren't enough
[Amit Varma]: women or I think there were no women represented. And the point that women correctly made there
[Amit Varma]: was that listen, our processes are very different. Men might have the privilege to take out large
[Amit Varma]: chunks of their time when they actually work and set those routines for themselves. But
[Amit Varma]: women often are struggling work, they're struggling, you know, marriage, they're struggling, not
[Amit Varma]: as in the marriages are struggling, but they're struggling with all these multiple things
[Amit Varma]: as marriage, their children, this work, there's looking after the household, even when you
[Amit Varma]: do get some free time, it's not quite free, because mentally, it's all there. So Curry
[Amit Varma]: to sort of Mason Curry to realizing to his credit that he kind of messed up here, came
[Amit Varma]: out with another book, which was Daily Rituals, Women at Work, right, where he just kind of
[Amit Varma]: focused on that. And one, regardless of what else you might be doing, I'm just amazed you
[Amit Varma]: got a book out in such a short time. And this is not a light book in the sense that on Kindle,
[Amit Varma]: it's about 3400 locations of actual text before the data starts, which I normally read in
[Amit Varma]: one sitting, and I managed to read it in one sitting anyway, but it would have normally
[Amit Varma]: taken me longer, not because the prose is lucid and clear, but you've packed in so much.
[Amit Varma]: And there are so many places, which are so thought provoking. So it's, it's a big book
[Amit Varma]: in that sense, it packs in a lot as obviously, you know, so, so what was that process like,
[Amit Varma]: of just in terms of pure habits, being able to create that mind space, where you can sit
[Amit Varma]: down and get into the flow of the book and all of that, how you know, share some of that
[Guest]: with me.
[Guest]: No, it's so interesting that you asked that because in in my case, it's the time and the
[Guest]: ritual really dictated the book. And in some ways, I would say not just the time that it
[Guest]: took, I really think it ended up having an impact on the content as well. I don't know
[Guest]: if in another time, both in my life and in the world, if I would have written maybe another
[Guest]: version of this, you know, I'm not writerly writer, Sonia is, she's a wonderful writer.
[Guest]: So, you know, I would not have had, I'm not sure that I would have the creativity to have
[Guest]: multiple ways in, I would probably have the same way into it. But it would definitely
[Guest]: have been different in multiple ways. So once the book got picked up at the end of December,
[Guest]: I have a wonderful agent whose name is Anish Chandi, who runs an agency called Labyrinth.
[Guest]: So I know nothing about writing books, I knew nothing about it, then I had no idea what
[Guest]: timelines were like. And he said me this, now that I realize extremely aggressive timeline
[Guest]: of, he said, so what about by the end of May, which was like five months. And I thought,
[Guest]: okay, that's what you're supposed to do. So I said, sure. And now I realized it was it
[Guest]: was a tight timeline. So once I knew that that's what I had in front of me, it was really
[Guest]: driven by everything else in the world then, which is one is that I had these, so my husband's
[Guest]: a lawyer, and it wasn't work that he could continue doing online because, sorry, from
[Guest]: home because courts had both restarted partially physically. But the other thing was also,
[Guest]: he has a lot of paperwork around it, colleagues who, you know, support him, and he had to
[Guest]: go into work for that. So I knew he would be out all day and I'm home with the kids
[Guest]: and they're really small. So I can't, I can't have video calls or that sort of stuff around
[Guest]: them. So I used to work, get up early in the morning and work for a bit before he left
[Guest]: to work. And then the rest of the day, it would really be chunks of work done over someone
[Guest]: asking me for a color pencil or where their rabbit has gone missing, bits of that through
[Guest]: the day. But then I got these three big chunks to write in. The first was when my parents
[Guest]: came to visit at the end of February and stayed for nearly two months. And they agreed with
[Guest]: my kids and my kids were really happy with them. And I could just write and I had taken
[Guest]: a break from most other regular journalistic work for, again, because it was, I said myself
[Guest]: five months, it didn't feel like I would be, you know, I could take five months off and
[Guest]: I didn't end up doing that because so much in the world was happening, especially around
[Guest]: COVID. I did end up doing regular reporting anyway. Then they left and then it was a sort
[Guest]: of summer holidays for courts as well. And between my husband and my in-laws, they could
[Guest]: do the remaining two months till the summer was over. So I knew I had that as well. And
[Guest]: I have a friend in Chennai who has a lovely little studio apartment with a big wooden
[Guest]: dining table. So as often as I could, I'd go, because even if I am at home, if even
[Guest]: if someone else is watching my kids, there's always like a Lego piece that only I can find.
[Guest]: And, you know, someone is always asking me for that. So I could go to her house, just,
[Guest]: you know, spread all my stuff at her dining table, drink lots of her coffee and, and get
[Guest]: it done. And because I had that deadline hanging over my head that the summer would end, the
[Guest]: kids would be back in at least online school and my husband would be back in court, I knew
[Guest]: I had to finish it off by then. So I don't know if I was. So one of the things that that
[Guest]: meant is that because I have all of this existing news reporting to build on, I took that as
[Guest]: a lot of the sort of skeleton for the book I wrote then. So I wonder if I had, you know,
[Guest]: if I was on a one-year writer's residency in the south of France, maybe I would have
[Guest]: done a sort of radical re-imagination of everything and come at it from another place and maybe
[Guest]: even re-examine some of the things that I had written or thought, I don't know, maybe
[Guest]: it would have been another book then. So, but because of the way my time was structured,
[Guest]: it did, it did end up having, you know, there were bones that were already there from my
[Guest]: news reporting earlier. So yeah, in my case, it is entirely a case of the daily rituals
[Guest]: driving, driving the story and probably in terms of content as well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, was there a sense that there were parts where you were happy to satisfy? Like
[Amit Varma]: satisfies for my listeners, of course, is a combination of satisfying and satisficing
[Amit Varma]: that sometimes rather than try to look for the perfect choice, you just you're satisfied
[Amit Varma]: with what suffices. For example, you know, I'll go out to buy a new shirt, I won't try
[Amit Varma]: a hundred shirts, I'll just, the first one which I like, which happens to fit, I'll just
[Amit Varma]: pick that up and similar for small purchases and so on. And in writing, what I often tell
[Amit Varma]: my students is when it comes to the first draft, you know, satisfies this, but trade
[Amit Varma]: off between getting it done and getting it right. And too many of us focus too hard on
[Amit Varma]: getting it right. You know, we make perfection the enemy of production. And it's important
[Amit Varma]: just to, at least for the first draft, just to get it done. Because I can understand that
[Amit Varma]: when you're a journalist, you're writing a thousand word story and there's a certain
[Amit Varma]: amount of effort and you've done so many of them that it's much easier. So but when you
[Amit Varma]: write something bigger, like, oh, this is a book, it is, you know, it feels like such
[Amit Varma]: a serious thing, and you really want to get it right. Were there moments where you were
[Amit Varma]: sort of second guessing what others would think of it? Or moments where you were saying
[Amit Varma]: that shit, I'm overthinking it, let me just get it done. Let me just, you know, get it
[Amit Varma]: down on paper. What was that like with you? I mean, was it relatively smooth? Or was there
[Guest]: agitated moments? No, there were certainly agitated moments also, because until I finally
[Guest]: sent it out, I didn't do a lot of showing it to other people or didn't do any of that
[Guest]: at all, in fact. And because in the last few years, I have spent so much of my time interacting
[Guest]: with other people who do also work with data. The big question, you know, you had Pramit
[Guest]: recently and Pramit and I talked and interacted so much about data. If this was a book that
[Guest]: I was first showing Pramit or picturing Pramit as my reader, I would think that there's nothing
[Guest]: in it for him to learn or be surprised by because, you know, Pramit knows all of this
[Guest]: already. So I certainly had that feeling that because I am not doing new and original reporting
[Guest]: for this. And again, as a news reporter, I'm so used to the need to say something new and
[Guest]: something new that you have yourself either drawn out from the data or from talking to
[Guest]: people that that feeling that I'm not saying something new stayed with me literally till
[Guest]: the first absolutely unbiased feedback from people at Westland. I was truly worried that
[Guest]: I was not saying anything new at all because I felt like these are things that I have reported
[Guest]: on so often before. I think satisficing is pretty much how I do a lot of journalism.
[Guest]: I do operate on tight deadlines and and I'm OK with that, you know, because most of it
[Guest]: I am quite OK and I have been OK during the pandemic also in terms of saying things that
[Guest]: do need to be said now with all while being honest to the data and saying that we don't
[Guest]: know. I have felt liberated by the ability to say we don't yet know in the last two years
[Guest]: so much. I have said it so much in the last two years. So so for example, recently I began
[Guest]: to see in a couple of states an increase in the share of those 60 and above in total COVID
[Guest]: deaths. And in other parts of the world where the data is in better shape, the immediate
[Guest]: question you would then end up asking is, are we seeing waning immunity? Now, the thing
[Guest]: is, we can't yet answer this question in India because we don't have the vaccination data
[Guest]: alongside it that would give us these good. But I was OK with doing that story to say
[Guest]: that this is what the data shows. It might not show waning immunity. It might just show
[Guest]: that younger people have now got vaccinated at rates that no longer give older people
[Guest]: relative advantage because now everybody is sort of equally vaccinated. But if this is
[Guest]: the case, then at least let's examine the data and have a conversation about boosters.
[Guest]: So I was OK with not having to not waiting for another month or two or till better data
[Guest]: comes out. I don't think I did that with the book, though. I don't think I was. Maybe the
[Guest]: first draft was just adequate and then I added things to it later. But no, I do feel that
[Guest]: I looked at all of the data that I did want to. I discarded things that I felt weren't
[Guest]: good enough. I stuck to only narratives that I felt were being honest to what the data
[Guest]: said and not sort of picking outlier things. I'm also happy with the conversations I ended
[Guest]: up having, the other reporting to fit into it. I don't think I'm a writer with much sort
[Guest]: of writerly flair. So I don't know if I had given that more time, if more of that would
[Guest]: have come out. I don't think so. I don't think I have that sort of, I don't think I have
[Guest]: those flourishes in me at all. So in news reporting, yes. But again, as I said, I don't
[Guest]: and you're not seeing that either. I don't see satisficing as a problem. In fact, for
[Guest]: fast developing things like the pandemic, I think we should keep satisficing every day
[Guest]: and then we'll reach a satisfying point, you know, with the collective knowledge at some
[Guest]: point.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's well said. And I keep saying the only way to, you know, get it right in
[Amit Varma]: the end is to just get it done again and again and again. And what you sort of spoke about
[Amit Varma]: about thinking that everything that you were writing about was obvious is something that
[Amit Varma]: I've thought about. I mean, it's what is called the curse of knowledge, right? You know a
[Amit Varma]: subject so well that everything about it seems obvious. And you assume sometimes that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there's a certain baseline level of knowledge that your reader shares with you,
[Amit Varma]: which is not always the case. And I realized that while doing a show also that sometimes
[Amit Varma]: there'll be episodes where I'll be like, okay, nice conversation, maybe there's not much
[Amit Varma]: new in it. And then there'll be feedback coming in saying, oh, this was a TIL or that was
[Amit Varma]: a TIL and my god, I didn't know that. So I keep reminding myself not to assume that everybody
[Amit Varma]: knows everything that you just, you know, have to make a good faith effort to strip
[Amit Varma]: yourself of those assumptions and just kind of keep going. So we'll take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break and at the other side of the break, we'll talk about whole numbers and half truths.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've enjoyed teaching 19 cohorts of my online course, the
[Amit Varma]: art of clear writing, and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction. In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I
[Amit Varma]: share all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises,
[Amit Varma]: much interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs
[Amit Varma]: rupees 10,000 plus GST or about $150 and registration is now open for my February 2020 cohort classes
[Amit Varma]: start on Saturday, February 5. So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills. I can help you. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Rukmini S about her wonderful book, Whole Numbers and Half Truths. And the
[Amit Varma]: reason I paused there was I keep forgetting the name of the book. So I had to kind of
[Amit Varma]: get the physical copy of the book in front of me and Rukmini pointed out that you can
[Amit Varma]: actually read the title of the book if it is standing in front of you without having
[Amit Varma]: to incline your head, which you do with everything else, which made me realize that even though
[Amit Varma]: we are a left leaning country when it comes to browsing books, we are a right head inclining
[Amit Varma]: country because just because of the way our book covers are designed. So maybe publishers
[Amit Varma]: ought to think more about that. And as Rukmini was telling me when I shared this thought
[Amit Varma]: with her, we're not perhaps a left leaning country either. So anyway, coming back to
[Amit Varma]: the book, I just want to start off with a comment on something that you know, I thought
[Amit Varma]: I should kind of I didn't want to butt in there. But you said you're not a writerly
[Amit Varma]: kind of writer. And you said, you know, you didn't have the time to aim for flair. And
[Amit Varma]: maybe you don't have it in you. And I think you were being unnecessarily modest, because
[Amit Varma]: I think what this book succeeds in very well, is just the clarity of prose, which is important,
[Amit Varma]: which is what is the important thing in a book like this. So for a book like this, I
[Amit Varma]: don't think I'd want writerly flourishes or novelistic approach, you know, which is much
[Amit Varma]: more suited to the kind of effort that Sessonia was doing with the good girls, right, where
[Amit Varma]: it makes so much difference. But over here, I sort of didn't feel that to be an issue
[Amit Varma]: at all. Now, one of the sort of things that you start off with in the introduction to
[Amit Varma]: your book, is you talk about how so many popular narratives have no basis, in fact, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: and yet they're popular. And these are not just WhatsApp narratives, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: of course have no basis, in fact, but these are even narratives that are popular among
[Amit Varma]: the commentary art, so to say among the experts that you see on television, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. So why is this, you know, when we are surrounded by data, we are surrounded
[Amit Varma]: by facts. And in fact, when many of these facts, much of this data has been pointed
[Amit Varma]: out by journalists like yourself, why is it that bad narratives continue to persist?
[Guest]: So unfortunately, I think it lies in the fact that the people who allow it to persist are
[Guest]: the ones whose beliefs that particular narrative conforms to. And you know, this again gets
[Guest]: at the heart of something that I worry about, which is, and we talked about this a bit before,
[Guest]: which is people come to me sometimes with a sort of hope that data journalism is the
[Guest]: thing that's going to change minds. And just as I feel, you know, worried about the ability
[Guest]: of journalism to change minds at all, I feel equally worried about the ability of data
[Guest]: journalism to change minds, just because there has been, I have seen this repeatedly, which
[Guest]: is the data driven, even though it might be faulty data, the data driven narratives that
[Guest]: persist are the ones that persist within that same bubble. And I have seen how these operate,
[Guest]: which is that if you do sort of cherry pick certain parts of a data set, or that data
[Guest]: said that thing at one point in time, then you sort of freeze your understanding at that
[Guest]: moment, and you continue to make that point for decades after, because it fits your biases.
[Guest]: So for example, if you look at sort of intra left debates, one of the sort of persistent
[Guest]: questions maybe 10 or 20 years ago was around why in a period of then increasing incomes,
[Guest]: calorific consumption was falling in India. And you know, this is a point that was raised
[Guest]: by Jean Drez and Angus Deaton at the time, and there were these passionate debates in
[Guest]: the EPW with people like, you know, the Patnaiks on the other side. So I think what had happened
[Guest]: then and you know, I, I read everything that Angus Deaton writes, and similarly, that Jean
[Guest]: Drez write, because, because what they did was this, which is that there was an understanding
[Guest]: about how calorific consumption operated that had got ossified in time. And Jean and Angus
[Guest]: Deaton were seeing in the data that it didn't, you know, that that had might have been a
[Guest]: snapshot in time, but the continuing trend didn't sort of merit that narrative. And they
[Guest]: looked at the numbers and they sort of raised questions about it. And it's invaluable what
[Guest]: they did, because it, it has ended up advancing our knowledge of how food operates, how societies
[Guest]: develop, what it means for food, what it means for calorific consumption, what changes in
[Guest]: the nature of work mean, all of those. And it's complicated. I mean, Angus and, Angus
[Guest]: Deaton and Jean, Jean's articles ended with questions, not certainty around why this was
[Guest]: happening. I see this again, similarly, in the last, say, five, seven years around the
[Guest]: issue of child stunting, which is a sort of, you know, pernicious, an indicator that's
[Guest]: not shifted considerably, and around which again, the sort of narrative had gone through
[Guest]: two phases. One was a sort of right-pushed narrative around genetics, which was sort
[Guest]: of largely debunked. I mean, debunked in the sense that we know the extent to which genetics
[Guest]: plays a role, and then there's all this variation that genetics cannot explain. Why, for example,
[Guest]: upper caste are the tallest people in India, and why, for example, South Asian communities
[Guest]: overseas are so much taller than an earlier generation would have been, similar in heights,
[Guest]: why Bangladeshis have become taller than those in West Bengal, for example, despite being
[Guest]: poorer at the time, not poorer anymore. So I think, again, that conversation on stunting
[Guest]: then took a significantly advanced turn in the last five years, where conversations around
[Guest]: one, inequality, both within households and among communities became central to that discussion,
[Guest]: and the key issue of sanitation, which, you know, we now know accounts for a large proportion
[Guest]: of the variation that you see in stunting, which is simply because if you are repeatedly
[Guest]: subject to bouts of diarrheal disease at a very young age, you're not able to accumulate
[Guest]: the nutrition that then has a lifelong impact on something like height. So people who did
[Guest]: look at the data to advance knowledge and sort of take ossified narratives forwards
[Guest]: are the ones who've done us such a service in terms of truly advancing human knowledge.
[Guest]: But the narratives that people love to hold dear to themselves, just as the narrative
[Guest]: around India being largely a tolerant country, that I think is actually very damaging, that
[Guest]: we've, so many of us have grown up with this sort of feeling that this, you know, going
[Guest]: to each other's houses at Eid in the valley is the sort of central Indian ethos and the
[Guest]: rest is the fringe, and I think not recognising what is the fringe and what is the mainstream
[Guest]: has done us a great deal of damage. Similarly, you know, there are narratives around, you
[Guest]: know, other issues around in the economy, role of liberalisation, for example, and outcomes
[Guest]: from there on and the impact it had. So, yeah, the narratives that I think pursue the long,
[Guest]: sorry, persist the longest are the ones that enjoy the greatest uptake within their own
[Guest]: constituencies. And I really have to think hard about how it is that narratives wither
[Guest]: within constituencies, and I admire people who have taken on board, and by no means am
[Guest]: I the person, you know, who's doing the majority of the sort of pushback or myth-busting out
[Guest]: there. But for example, those in the feminist movement who I feel in the last five years
[Guest]: have really significantly taken on board what's come out from the data, which is that equating
[Guest]: sexual assault statistics with the sort of quote-unquote stranger rape that we think
[Guest]: of often around sexual assault is problematic, and sort of accepting the role of laws that
[Guest]: are there to protect women against sexual violence, the role of those very laws in victimising
[Guest]: both men and women and consenting relationships that go against other social norms. I think
[Guest]: the feminist movement has taken that on board, that, you know, even though it has meant challenging
[Guest]: deeply held beliefs and also challenging coming to terms with whether the laws and reforms
[Guest]: that you pushed so hard for have had horrific unintended consequences against women, who
[Guest]: I really see as the primary, continued primary victims of this. So I do see that acceptance.
[Guest]: I also think that this acceptance among, you know, I like seeing acceptance among people
[Guest]: who feel that they are middle class, for example, or that, you know, that there's only a very
[Guest]: tiny super-rich and they're not part of it, and that acceptance that they are, they, we,
[Guest]: us, all of us are part of the one percenters. You do see that, and when you see that sort
[Guest]: of dawning realisation, it is gratifying. So I don't have a theory about what it is
[Guest]: that causes, I have a theory about what it is that causes narratives to persist, but
[Guest]: what is it that causes narratives to wither away is the thing that I find harder to understand.
[Guest]: And it matters, because if you do want to believe in the goodness of some others in
[Guest]: the ideologically opposite positions from you, and you do think that that constituency
[Guest]: to appeal to goodness or to, you know, factfulness in other people does exist, in some people
[Guest]: does exist, then it becomes important to think about what will it take for those narratives
[Guest]: to go. And yeah, I don't have the answer to that, but I think it's really important and
[Guest]: we should be thinking harder about what it will take to change, change minds when something
[Guest]: has been held here for so long.
[Amit Varma]: I think one quote that comes to mind is how paradigms change one funeral at a time, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, essentially alludes to the point that you can't really change people's mind,
[Amit Varma]: but dominant narratives change when a lot of the people who held them grow old and they
[Amit Varma]: die out, and then new narratives come. Like what I think of people like me doing and people
[Amit Varma]: like you doing and in the different ways that we approach this is that we are really playing
[Amit Varma]: the long game. And this is more true for me than a few, hopefully, you can change a lot
[Amit Varma]: of minds in the short term as well. But I see the game as you're playing the long game,
[Amit Varma]: you're trying to, you know, people who haven't made up their minds yet, people who are still
[Amit Varma]: intellectually curious, who haven't really decided upon one worldview, or who are still
[Amit Varma]: young enough to not be rigid in those worldviews. Hopefully, you can have an impact on them
[Amit Varma]: and an impact on them not in terms of persuading them to this worldview or that worldview,
[Amit Varma]: but merely the value of skepticism, the value of conversation, the value of kind of questioning
[Amit Varma]: everything. So I see it partly as, you know, playing that kind of long game. And again,
[Amit Varma]: one of the things that increasingly and partly through the conversations I've had, I've realized
[Amit Varma]: is that I was so wrong about so many aspects of India, because I grew up in this elite
[Amit Varma]: English speaking bubble. So we made these convenient assumptions, like, oh, basically,
[Amit Varma]: we are liberal, and basically, we're tolerant. And we made all these assumptions. And those
[Amit Varma]: assumptions are really not the fact in a sense, we are the fringe, right. And, and the way
[Amit Varma]: to look at that is therefore not with despair, but to take that as a challenge. I mean, this
[Amit Varma]: was a whole point that I think Gandhi was trying to make those decades ago, when he
[Amit Varma]: said that you cannot fashion society in a top down way, like we try to do with our constitution,
[Amit Varma]: you have to change society from within, which is a challenge all of us have to take up.
[Guest]: And Amit, if I can just jump in around one thing you were saying, in a very literal way,
[Guest]: the quote on paradigms changing one funeral at a time, one, something that struck me was
[Guest]: the way I did see some minds or views changing around when the data around excess mortality
[Guest]: in India started coming in. And in a very literal way, I literally felt that this was
[Guest]: happening one funeral at a time, because and, you know, when you're using the word worldview,
[Guest]: word worldview, one of the things that came to mind was that even if worldviews are not
[Guest]: changing, there are aspects of it within that, that, that I think can change. And then maybe,
[Guest]: you know, and I don't, I don't have a grand project. So I don't know what it is that I
[Guest]: sort of want to change in worldviews. But if it is still possible that you might have
[Guest]: this grand worldview, but elements of that you are still willing to see what comes of
[Guest]: it, and maybe change minds. So I do believe that, that a significant, this is totally
[Guest]: unscientific, but I do believe that people have broadly come around to the acceptance
[Guest]: that a lot of people died of COVID in India, and the official data does not count this.
[Guest]: And they do not have to come at it from a union government suppressed data way. It can
[Guest]: come from all sorts of things like doctors don't put the right names on death certificates,
[Guest]: or there were so many people that people couldn't be counted, or in rural areas, nobody even
[Guest]: knows what people die of, or a particular city government or state government who you
[Guest]: hate is the one doing the suppressing. But I do feel for two things. One is just because
[Guest]: of the ridiculous sheer number of people who died, everybody knew someone who died. So
[Guest]: it, it no longer became a narrative that could, you know, we don't have that sort of centralizing
[Guest]: or sort of intoxicating force that even if you see reality crumble around you, you still
[Guest]: continue to believe what your sort of dear leader is telling you is reality. And I do
[Guest]: feel like people, because enough of this reporting happened by multiple people across newsrooms
[Guest]: and across languages, you know, we had the Gujarati media reporting on this, we had the
[Guest]: Hindi media, media reporting as well as the English media across multiple states. And
[Guest]: I don't think this necessarily matters to more than like 25 people, but we all of us
[Guest]: put all of our data on GitHub. So if you were the sort of person who'd want to look at that,
[Guest]: you could look at the data yourselves. So yeah, I think maybe one news report at a time
[Guest]: and one funeral at a time, minds did change around deaths in India. Just to think of it
[Guest]: in terms of if you and I went downstairs right now and had a cup of tea at the chaiwala downstairs
[Guest]: and asked the people around us that, you know, the official number in India is that four
[Guest]: lakh people died of COVID. Do you think it's more than that? I really don't think it would
[Guest]: be very hard to find a single person anywhere in the country who says, no, is the union
[Guest]: government saying four lakh? Then I totally believe only four lakh people died of COVID.
[Guest]: So yeah, those same people's worldviews are not necessarily things that I'm changing.
[Guest]: But it does seem, yeah, maybe parts of it, you know, just by being confronted with, if
[Guest]: it's something that you can see with echoes of it in the real world around you, as well
[Guest]: as broad based reporting. So yeah, maybe, maybe it then changes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a great point. And an added twist to the phrase one funeral at a time. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we were chatting about this earlier at lunch, and where you asked me if I'm still
[Amit Varma]: consider myself a libertarian. And I said, no, you know, I reject the label, but that's
[Amit Varma]: the closest anyone can come to, you know, putting one on me. So I don't mind it. But
[Amit Varma]: I reject the label, because labels are used always these days in a tribal way as pejoratives.
[Amit Varma]: And why not just avoid that? But you know, what, you know, just sort of going back to
[Amit Varma]: that, I find that the things that I am rigid about, our values, but the things that I'm
[Amit Varma]: completely open to being convinced otherwise about our facts. So I know what my values
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, so I value individual freedom, autonomy, consent, all of those things. I'm
[Amit Varma]: fairly rigid on that. But as far as facts are concerned, you know, you know, are we
[Amit Varma]: a tolerant people has calorific intake gone up and gone down, I'm willing to be convinced
[Amit Varma]: by you know, the most convincing argument, and so on. And I think that this is also something
[Amit Varma]: that can apply to everybody. Like Arnold Kling wrote this great book called the three languages
[Amit Varma]: of politics, where he pointed out that we are talking past each other. So so much of
[Amit Varma]: the time, because we start from different first principles, from which we can draw different
[Amit Varma]: coherent arguments, like he looked at the American example, where the progressives care
[Amit Varma]: about equality, libertarians care about freedom, conservatives care about tradition, and they'll
[Amit Varma]: start from the first principles and reach different conclusions, but they're completely
[Amit Varma]: coherent. And they're talking past each other, because they don't take each other's first
[Amit Varma]: principles into account. And what I would simply say to everyone is that don't change
[Amit Varma]: what you value the most, whether it's equality, freedom, tradition, whatever, you don't have
[Amit Varma]: to change that. But as long as you're open to facts of the world around you, because
[Amit Varma]: the world is deeply complex, it is so incredibly arrogant to think you have anything figured
[Amit Varma]: out, even within your book, after all that I've read and all the conversations I've had,
[Amit Varma]: there were certain parts of your book, which took me by surprise and made me look at things
[Amit Varma]: in a new way, but always, when it came to the facts, and that would be the case, regardless
[Amit Varma]: of what ideology I might, you know, have as a prior.
[Guest]: So, you know, what would happen if parts of your values were based on facts, which then
[Guest]: could change, you know, and I do feel like that is something that I have encountered
[Guest]: when, when I have had these questions around some daily leftist beliefs, for example, because
[Guest]: if you, you know, I suppose this is taking the idea of a value very far. But if you believe
[Guest]: that there are some aspects of how states function that do achieve aims that you believe
[Guest]: in, like, you know, better redistribution, equality, and then you find that those pathways
[Guest]: don't lead there, that's when you start to shut your ears to the facts, I think, then,
[Guest]: you know, because if you find that, you know, states that you believed had the most redistributive
[Guest]: policies, but are not the ones that ended up giving the greatest leg up to those who
[Guest]: started the furthest way behind, then I would imagine that that's sometimes where this might
[Amit Varma]: break down.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I can think of a couple more examples of that, like one is a simple Hindu Khatre
[Amit Varma]: Mein Hai narrative, where it is very easy to bring data and show that boss, at least
[Amit Varma]: in India, Hindu Khatre Mein Nahi Hai, we are the dominant majority, we are chilling, we're
[Amit Varma]: doing really well, broadly speaking. And the other area is, like, for example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of what the left would, I mean, I don't want to use labels, but what to do, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of what the left would support depends, a lot of the policies they would support, they
[Amit Varma]: would support on the basis of good intentions, and ignore the outcomes. For example, when
[Amit Varma]: the UP government last year decided to get rid of the labour laws, now you can argue
[Amit Varma]: about the way in which they chose to carry it all out and with specifics in the bill.
[Amit Varma]: But the fact is that those labour laws, while they may have been well intentioned, harmed
[Amit Varma]: workers more than they helped them. We have like, decades of sort of, you know, history
[Amit Varma]: backing that up. And yet people who, you know, just went by the intention of the laws and
[Amit Varma]: by the fact that it came from a political regime that they opposed and that I also oppose,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it was just a reflexive doubling down on, oh, how we, you know, we need these
[Amit Varma]: labour laws and an inability to actually examine that do these laws even achieve what they're
[Amit Varma]: supposed to achieve? So I get that. But my next question then is, you know, just taking
[Amit Varma]: off from that, that sometimes facts are also unclear in the sense that they don't prove
[Amit Varma]: one thing or the other. Like you can't do controlled experiments in social science.
[Amit Varma]: Like my friend Shruti Rajgopalan once gave me a great example where she said that if
[Amit Varma]: you are doing a scientific experiment on whether dropping a coin in a beaker of water displaces
[Amit Varma]: some water, it's really easy to do it in a lab because you measure everything precisely.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost impossible to do it in a swimming pool, because there's just so much activity,
[Amit Varma]: 40 people jumping up and down, you'll sometimes get the opposite result. No matter what happens,
[Amit Varma]: you can't attribute causation, you can't say it's because of this, the real world is messy,
[Amit Varma]: so many things interacting. And therefore, you know, as you correctly say, in your intro
[Amit Varma]: as well, that, you know, statistics don't tell us everything, quote, they need context
[Amit Varma]: interpretation as free from ideological spin and to be held up to the light, quote. And
[Amit Varma]: in some cases, this is obviously easier to do than in other cases. So you can convincingly
[Amit Varma]: today make the case that more people died of COVID than the official figures indicate.
[Amit Varma]: But it's much, much harder to make a nuanced point about, you know, whether farmers in
[Amit Varma]: a particular place would be better off without an APMC, or whether the labor laws in a particular
[Amit Varma]: state actually harm the workers more than they help them, because there are so many
[Amit Varma]: factors at play, there are no counterfactuals, there's no controlled experiment. I mean,
[Guest]: I'm just kind of thinking aloud from...
[Guest]: Yeah, no, and I know that then this leads people to a place of feeling that that one
[Guest]: set of facts can be argued with another set of facts. It leads you to a place of not knowing,
[Guest]: I mean, all sort of WhatsApp arguments are not about facts versus lies. There's also
[Guest]: one set of facts versus another set of facts. And I remember in the early days of the pandemic,
[Guest]: when I started this pandemic podcast, I remember feeling then that it was like my job to figure
[Guest]: out what the facts were. And very quickly, I realized that that was going to be impossible.
[Guest]: I don't have, you know, the training to evaluate scientific evidence. And I was feeling just
[Guest]: as other people were that I was seeing sort of contradictory sets of things by otherwise
[Guest]: sort of credentialed people and not knowing, you know, so having been through that myself,
[Guest]: especially in a moment where I felt like I had to have an answer. And maybe many people
[Guest]: do, even on WhatsApp, they might feel like they need to show that they know what it all
[Guest]: means. Yeah, I see how that gets difficult and complicated. And then, you know, assuming
[Guest]: bad faith about people arguing one way or the other is not fair, if they are sort of
[Guest]: choosing to look at evidence that then goes along with their beliefs. And on some things,
[Guest]: there is a sort of broader truth, which is that you evaluate all of the evidence from
[Guest]: these different places. And there is a sort of larger argument to be made. And of course,
[Guest]: it's always a nuanced argument. It is. And you know, the argument may be that, yes, this
[Guest]: really was good for these people, and not good for others. And if you are one of those
[Guest]: people, or you care about those people, and then you want to take a decision based on
[Guest]: that, fine, that that's what you're doing. But then, you know, don't go ahead and argue
[Guest]: that it's going to be equally good for everyone. Maybe just accept that it's good for the people
[Guest]: you care about, or you are yourself. Yeah, but I can see how it leads people to feel,
[Guest]: I think people have felt this a lot in the last two years, that any set of studies can
[Guest]: be argued against with another set of studies, and all of these are sort of published. And
[Guest]: yeah, so I suppose at some point, then that leads you to, again, seeking out evidence
[Guest]: from people who you, you know, I find myself doing this sometimes, and I really have to
[Guest]: stop myself, that if I see a study, then I'll want to know a little bit about the politics,
[Guest]: meaning not party politics, but the sort of worldview politics of the person who did it,
[Guest]: to know then whether, and you know, this might be something about masking, it might be a
[Guest]: study about masking that's been published in like the BMJ. But I still feel like I want
[Guest]: to end up looking at this person's views before deciding. I don't know, maybe, you know, maybe
[Guest]: you need some filter to get through the world, otherwise, what are you going to read about
[Guest]: everyone? Yeah, I don't, I don't have a good answer for this. And I don't blame people
[Guest]: for then having these, these sorts of arguments about sets of facts. I suppose, to satisfy
[Guest]: yourself, you should know that you've done whatever due diligence you at the level of
[Guest]: either, you know, regular reader or a journalist have done with the data, which is that you
[Guest]: have tried to assure yourself that you haven't cherry picked it. And you know, you've been
[Guest]: true to the broader story of what the numbers are saying, not just looking for that one
[Guest]: terrible indicator, which is the way a lot of us journalists are taught to report on
[Guest]: something like the census, which is pick the one indicator that tells a bad news story
[Guest]: and tell a story about it. So I suppose, when I talk about holding the numbers up to the
[Guest]: light and along with context, it's that you're that at least you satisfy yourself that you're
[Guest]: being fair to the numbers, if nothing else. Yeah, and I agree with you, the last two years,
[Amit Varma]: especially it's been damn complicated, because you have so much contrary information flying
[Amit Varma]: about that, on the one hand, if you see a study on masking, like you said, the logical
[Amit Varma]: the correct way to look at every study would be to ignore the affiliation of the person
[Amit Varma]: or what they might feel and just look at the data on its own. But we don't have the time
[Amit Varma]: or the mental bandwidth to look at every study. So it's a useful heuristic to have, who is
[Amit Varma]: this person? Where are they coming from? I remember I did an episode with Gautam Menon
[Amit Varma]: or one of the COVID episodes I did, maybe Lancelot Pinto, where we spoke about how ivermectin
[Amit Varma]: is rubbish, it doesn't work, right. And there had been enough studies that showed that.
[Amit Varma]: And I got assaulted on email and Twitter by so many people with such anger. It's like
[Amit Varma]: somebody believes in God and you're telling them, hey, your God doesn't exist. He's rubbish.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it was that kind of furore that they took it to took it so much to heart that
[Amit Varma]: no, ivermectin works. And one of them sent me like reams after reams of so called evidence.
[Amit Varma]: And if I'm a neutral person who doesn't know how to read all of this information, it would
[Amit Varma]: seem so convincing to me, right. So just kind of navigating that alone becomes a problem.
[Guest]: And so I let's kind of go back to your book. Ivermectin army in particular is quite unlike
[Guest]: most things that I've encountered. Even I would say they sort of stand out in sort of
[Guest]: true believerness. And I have been not assaulted by this army, I have been attempted to be
[Guest]: recruited by this army as well. So people who I otherwise, you know, knew in my normal
[Guest]: professional life to be people like you, you know, they took their office bags and went
[Guest]: to office and you never knew what was going on. I have got in touch with me as if they
[Guest]: are sort of, I don't know, Freemasons or something, literally an attempt to recruit. So it's,
[Guest]: you know, you always and there are some, it's almost like the hashtags that you mute on
[Guest]: Twitter. There's a particular, so I'm going to allude to it without mentioning it, otherwise
[Guest]: we're going to get another fresh wave of this. But you know of a popular conspiracy theory
[Guest]: around a recently deceased actor that's taken over Twitter. It's sort of had that, the Ivermectin
[Guest]: has had those echoes in it to me, which is of a bizarrely organized army. So I've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about my favorite SSR theory quite often on the show. You're feeding the... The quantum
[Amit Varma]: mechanics one, you know, the quantum mechanics one. No, I'm too scared. I'll link it from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. So now I have to tell you, you can pretend to ignore me and look out
[Amit Varma]: of the window. But basically the theory is that once he had, SSR had tweeted, say showing
[Amit Varma]: his interest in a particular phenomenon in quantum mechanics, which I think split something
[Amit Varma]: into two, an atom or a proton or whatever splits it into two. So the theory is that
[Amit Varma]: he had mastered this technique or whatever, and he had split himself into two. And the
[Amit Varma]: SSR who died was actually the duplicate. And the real SSR has been kidnapped by someone
[Amit Varma]: or is in hiding because Yogi Adityanath is looking for the real SSR, because the real
[Amit Varma]: SSR invented Covaxin. And it gets really crazy. It's a fantastic long thread. It's a masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, there are many other conspiracy theories, like he invented the game Foggy,
[Amit Varma]: the Indian version of PUBG, and Akshay Kumar had him killed because Akshay Kumar wanted
[Amit Varma]: to claim or whatever. So that's another crazy story that is out there.
[Guest]: See, Amit, since I have a book to sell, I'm going to nod in a genial fashion to all of
[Guest]: these things and not risk upsetting anyone, except to throw in this thing, which is that
[Guest]: I recently found out that if through accident a starfish gets broken into two pieces, each
[Guest]: of them form new starfishes. And this has not stopped. I mean, I've spent an inordinate
[Guest]: amount of time thinking about it. So that's the direction I'm going to take the splitting
[Amit Varma]: into two into. You have no idea what you've just done. There
[Amit Varma]: are going to be threads on this. We don't even need quantum mechanics. We need starfish.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you know, so here's again, a question that I'm sure since you think a lot about
[Amit Varma]: truth and facts and alternative facts and these narratives and all that, something that
[Amit Varma]: I can't figure out, that a lot of the vehemence of these either these SSR types or the Ivermectin
[Amit Varma]: types or the QAnon types, there are so many types, is that they all seem to be cultists
[Amit Varma]: in search of a cult. Why are so many people cultists in search of a cult? Do you have
[Amit Varma]: any thoughts on that? Like what is this? Why do so many people want so desperately to believe
[Guest]: in things like this? I'm going to come up with pure pop psychology
[Guest]: for this. And I wonder if, you know, the sort of standard pop psychology explanation of
[Guest]: this would be that there were figures in the past to whom, at whose feet you could prostrate
[Guest]: yourself and seek their, you know, seek community and sort of shared belief and whether they
[Guest]: were caste leaders or religious leaders. And maybe with the way, you know, with the way
[Guest]: we all live now in the cities we all live, you can't, you don't have access to your godmen
[Guest]: of choice anymore. Though there are those, there are equally vehement godmen cults on
[Guest]: Twitter as well. So yeah, maybe in the absence of that, people are looking, and you know,
[Guest]: I'm being facetious about this, but there is, I do understand that sense of wanting
[Guest]: to belong to a community that believes strongly in something and that seems to have a higher
[Guest]: purpose than just your mundane existence. And I don't mean this in a condescending way.
[Guest]: We all want that. We all want a higher purpose community. And, you know, we find it in different
[Guest]: ways, but perhaps this is what people are seeking. And also, I mean, clearly there is
[Guest]: a sense of, you know, in the conspiracy ones at least, there is a sense of being wrong
[Guest]: by the state and the need to put it in some concrete fashion or have an individually wronged
[Guest]: person embody that even, you know. The reasons that you're willing to believe all of this
[Guest]: in a way has to be because you have seen some of the depredations of the state and you do
[Guest]: believe it as a state that can do acts of terrible violence, including having people
[Guest]: killed for business interests. I mean, these are not fantastical beliefs in that respect.
[Guest]: The quantum mechanics part might be, but, you know, all of the rest of what an all-powerful
[Guest]: state or a corporate can do are sort of based in fact. So I do sometimes see, when you see
[Guest]: what parts of the Indian state do, then imagining them to do things to individuals to whom it
[Guest]: was not done is not that big of a leap of faith.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And a lot of things that sound like conspiracy theories actually did turn out
[Amit Varma]: to be true. For example, you know, everything we know about diet is wrong, for example,
[Amit Varma]: everything we believe for decades. I mean, America's obesity epidemic was in part caused
[Amit Varma]: by the state coming up with those dietary guidelines in I think 1977, where they basically
[Amit Varma]: followed the dictates of the sugar lobby, which had funded so many studies which demonize
[Amit Varma]: fat and said, hey, sugar is okay. Well, today, we know it's just the opposite. So they see
[Amit Varma]: Ghee Zindabad and don't look at me like that. It's I've just been eating carbs, carbs, carbs
[Amit Varma]: all through the lockdown, which is why I am what I am. But when I was last on a keto diet,
[Amit Varma]: I was 22 kgs lighter. But we shall not go to diet territory. And in fact, when some
[Amit Varma]: of my friends tell me that all this keto intermittent fasting, this is another cult.
[Guest]: It absolutely is. You can't get keto people to stop talking about keto. That would be
[Guest]: a true sort of act of restraint if they stop talking about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I haven't mentioned keto in the longest time. But there is that joke. How do you know
[Amit Varma]: if someone's on keto? They will tell you. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And just sort of a thought
[Amit Varma]: that came like when I have been chatting about the creator economy or the media in recent
[Amit Varma]: times, one thing that's definitely happening there is that that mainstream is dissipating
[Amit Varma]: and many, many niches are kind of coming up. Like Steve Van Zandt, who was you know, the
[Amit Varma]: guitarist of the E Street Band with Bruce Springsteen, once said that, you know, rock
[Amit Varma]: was mainstream between the late 60s and the early 90s, a period of about 30 years, I think
[Amit Varma]: till Nirvana. And now there's no mainstream anymore in music. And similarly, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you look at the media, there was mainstream media, all of us got our information from
[Amit Varma]: the same places. Once upon a time, there was a consensus on the truth that's completely
[Amit Varma]: dissipated. Everybody consumes information from different places. And I wonder if a similar
[Amit Varma]: thing is true, when it comes to belief, that earlier you had mainstream sources of belief,
[Amit Varma]: mainstream delusions, we could all agree upon like religions, you know, or the state, which
[Amit Varma]: I say is a bit the biggest religion in India is a religion of government, or the state.
[Amit Varma]: But now you have all these little sort of perhaps intersecting at times, little niches
[Amit Varma]: of belief. So you have your SSR and you have your, oh, the pharma lobby created COVID,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which is doesn't sound that far off from the sugar lobby caused obesity, which
[Amit Varma]: of course it did, and so on and so forth. So I wonder if you have any thoughts on that
[Amit Varma]: in general, that in those two fields, at least the creator economy and media, I find that
[Amit Varma]: you had mainstream monoliths once upon a time, and now it's all dispersed and all little
[Amit Varma]: pockets happening. But do you feel that's also the case, perhaps with belief or in other
[Guest]: areas? Yeah, though, you know, I find it hard to imagine of hard to be sure of how much
[Guest]: of belief was, was consolidated in the past. And, you know, whether these sort of individual
[Guest]: whimsies did exist then too, but perhaps with less documentation and with less sort of real
[Guest]: world impact. I mean, all of us can think of grandparents who were completely convinced
[Guest]: about some particular thing or had a particular belief. And, you know, I don't mean that these
[Guest]: were all wrong or fake. These were things that they particularly deeply held or believed
[Guest]: in. And yeah, you know, you really do see, you really do see the diversity of sources
[Guest]: for information. I see it, for example, in even in the ways people have come to hear
[Guest]: of the book, I find it so fascinating to ask people, if they come to talk to me where they
[Guest]: heard of it from, because it's, for example, Ravish Kumar, the journalist who I admire
[Guest]: deeply did an Insta post about my book. And he did it in Hindi and it didn't have a link
[Guest]: or anything. I think he had, I don't even know if there was a picture of the cover,
[Guest]: perhaps just a picture of the cover. And he said nice things about it. And I met a young
[Guest]: man in Bangalore who said he saw that and then sought it out. And so, so just the whole
[Guest]: pathway to it, you know, was fascinating to me. And yeah, of course, I mean, nothing like
[Guest]: speaking to younger people to feel like you don't, it's so hard to say what the best way
[Guest]: to get any sort of information out would be. You know, I remember if people were ever planning
[Guest]: an event, then they would have like three, four verticals, you know, we'll speak to the
[Guest]: three top newspapers, we'll speak, I really wonder what those sort of conversations look
[Guest]: like right now, because it depends so much on what it is that you're talking about as
[Guest]: well. And yeah, I mean, again, I feel like I would get into the realm of pop psychology
[Guest]: if I began to think about what these beliefs come from. Also, you know, not to overstate
[Guest]: that point, because the sort of core of many of the beliefs that I do talk about in the
[Guest]: book, do sort of coalesce around a few key issues that are very mainstream, which is
[Guest]: Islamophobia, for example, which is really a sort of central focus around which a lot
[Guest]: of the smaller beliefs do come around. So I don't know if, you know, maybe they're entering
[Guest]: into the space through multiple and unusual and newer ways, but they do seem to be coalescing
[Guest]: around fairly well-trodden paths.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So before we get down to many of the sort of concrete insights in your book, final
[Amit Varma]: kind of abstract question, which takes off from this paragraph from your introduction,
[Amit Varma]: which is also a piece of excellent writing. So I think you do yourself a disservice when
[Amit Varma]: you underplay that part of what you do. So I'll just read it out and then come to my
[Amit Varma]: question. And you write, quote, this is a country of wonder and beauty, of idealism
[Amit Varma]: and sacrifice, of extraordinary leaps of faith, and people who move mountains. Numbers, far
[Amit Varma]: from being cold and unintelligible, can capture much of this nuance, this humanity that prepackaged
[Amit Varma]: narratives sometimes flatten out. If Indian statistics have seemed impenetrable, that
[Amit Varma]: is a failing of the community that produces data and works with it. Everyone should hear
[Amit Varma]: the stories numbers tell and then make up their minds about the country, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And to what extent, and I ask this since you've also thought about the craft of writing since
[Amit Varma]: you've written this book, to what extent is storytelling an important part of what you
[Amit Varma]: do? Because many data people could just say that I'm going to get the data and I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to get the best data I possibly can. And that's the end of it. That's my job done. Whereas
[Amit Varma]: you clearly are not just getting data, you're also thinking about how to contextualize it,
[Amit Varma]: how to make it persuasive, how to tell the story. So, you know, what are your insights?
[Amit Varma]: What are the insights that you've had while thinking about this aspect, the storytelling
[Amit Varma]: aspect? And do you feel that more people in the data business should take this more seriously
[Guest]: if their work is to have more meaning? Yeah, I think about this a lot. And one of
[Guest]: the things I worry about is that by having these sorts of conversations or sort of creating
[Guest]: this sort of theory around how storytelling around data can be done, that I will myself
[Guest]: end up creating a formulaic model, which I really worry about. Because some even people
[Guest]: in government have recently got in touch and said, you know, we put out these reports and
[Guest]: nobody reads them. But then the way you've written it is making people read it. So, you
[Guest]: know, we also should think about how we should open with a good story. And my heart sinks
[Guest]: when I hear that. Because if the only point is to have that person for the introduction
[Guest]: of your story, then that's another reduction, another formula, which is why I feel very
[Guest]: privileged that so much of the stories I picked up without intending to pick them up as stories,
[Guest]: you know, this wasn't the point of those conversations to have them reflect this data.
[Guest]: Because in the few instances when I did that, which is when I was writing about something
[Guest]: and I needed to find a few people who would accurately sort of reflect what I was talking
[Guest]: about, it always ended up following a pretty, you know, it felt like I was doing social
[Guest]: science research rather than storytelling. I needed to say, okay, well, I'm looking
[Guest]: for a town of roughly this size and a family or maybe a woman who belongs to perhaps this
[Guest]: community who has a BPL card that says this on, you know, yeah, I never felt very good
[Guest]: about that. And those, those stories, I mean, that will check that box, but it won't necessarily
[Guest]: provide an interesting story. So I feel lucky that having been a reporter who was sent all
[Guest]: over the place for reporting stories, I ended up picking up the stuff as byproducts that
[Guest]: then formed these pictures in my mind. And if I if this wasn't how I had gotten to it,
[Guest]: if I had started as a data journalist or even started as someone who wanted to write this
[Guest]: book, I don't know how I would have done it and whether it would have told these same
[Guest]: stories at all. So I don't know, I really struggle with this. If I if I was to write,
[Guest]: you know, suppose there was another book in the future, which took say another 10 themes.
[Guest]: And if there were some of these that I hadn't done reporting around, I don't have a good
[Guest]: model for how for how to do this. I see the power of of stories and actually connecting
[Guest]: with people. And I also feel that it's important. In some places, it really felt satisfying
[Guest]: and validating to have stories that made the points about the messiness of data that I
[Guest]: was trying to talk about. So for example, and you know, when I hear that paragraph being
[Guest]: read back to me, I realized that in my mind, I had a lot of it was around data on voting,
[Guest]: because I really do feel very passionately about electoral and sort of political data
[Guest]: and the sort of flattening of it, especially faced with an electorate, who is so passionate,
[Guest]: people are so passionate around voting, and with such deeply inspiring beliefs that drive
[Guest]: it. And you know, I have a couple of stories in the chapter on voting where I speak to
[Guest]: two women in Chennai, one of whom was voting for the ADMK because she was voting in Jayalalithaa's
[Guest]: name. And her, you know, reasoning was that this was a woman in a man's world. And she
[Guest]: felt she identified with that. And the other, her neighbor was a woman who was voting for
[Guest]: the DMK, who felt that she wanted to keep out a party that she believed was a Hindi
[Guest]: Hindu party. Both of them had taken money from the respective parties that they had
[Guest]: voted for. And this sort of flattening of people in Tamil Nadu vote for the person who
[Guest]: gives them money is so common, especially in the last few years. And I feel offended
[Guest]: on behalf of voters that this is what their, you know, the complicated matrices in their
[Guest]: minds have been reduced to this. So that was an instance in which I felt good about those
[Guest]: stories being able to explain the messiness in the numbers that otherwise, when you report
[Guest]: purely on surveys, you sort of have this veneer of scientific reasoning or certainty that
[Guest]: stories like this actually complicate. So those are instances in which I feel convinced
[Guest]: of the importance and the power of storytelling in it. In others, I do worry that, you know,
[Guest]: am I giving the medicine with a spoon of honey, which is drawing people who typically are
[Guest]: not fond of looking at numbers in with a well-told story? And should I think of it as, okay,
[Guest]: well, that's bringing them in to look at the numbers and that's what's important? Or is
[Guest]: that not a sort of intellectually honest way of going about it? So I don't know, there
[Guest]: are some instances in which I feel satisfied with the storytelling and others in which
[Guest]: I know it did the job, but it isn't necessarily intellectually satisfying.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's really interesting in the sense that you seem to be saying that there are
[Amit Varma]: therefore two imperatives that you can have as someone doing these stories. And one is
[Amit Varma]: what you referred to in terms of doing the job that you're drawing the reader in and
[Amit Varma]: making whatever case you're putting forth compelling to the reader. And you're doing
[Amit Varma]: that with the help of a story. But on the other hand, you seem to be implying that it
[Amit Varma]: also feels a little manipulative to you. Have I read that correctly?
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely. It does. And, and it also because the sort of broader aim is to have
[Guest]: people respect the numbers for what they are and feel and sort of come at it as grown-ups,
[Guest]: you know, not that you are children who need to be led into it, and sort of a story being
[Guest]: dangled in front of you. And, you know, I really resist this thing that people don't
[Guest]: want to read this, people are not interested in data. If you look at the top most read
[Guest]: stories in anything, any website, it always shows Bollywood, that's what people want
[Guest]: to read. I really resist those theories. And I have never felt that in a newsroom. I also
[Guest]: don't feel that from my bubble of the people I speak to. So it doesn't just feel manipulative,
[Guest]: it also feels that I'm not being straight with people, you know, that I'm treating them
[Guest]: as children or as someone who can't handle data, and I'm having to sort of sugarcoat
[Guest]: it for them. And maybe that's not what people want. Maybe they could have dealt with those
[Guest]: numbers just straight up. So I do know that. So the number one editorial feedback I get,
[Guest]: and I imagine this happens to a lot of people who work with data, is the phrase humanize,
[Guest]: that you need to humanize the numbers. And, you know, I was recently rereading a book
[Guest]: called Dataclism, which was written by one of the co-founders of OkCupid. And in the
[Guest]: book, he sort of has access to a lot of, it's the sort of book that you wish would be written
[Guest]: now, because there's so much richer consumer data. And in fact, that's a big area of data
[Guest]: that's not made available in India. So all of my data has that sort of old schoolness
[Guest]: to it, because it doesn't have data from an Amazon, for example, or Google or Facebook,
[Guest]: all of which tells us so much about modern India, but I don't have access to that data.
[Guest]: So he had access to OkCupid, and I think maybe Tinder, or maybe there was Match.com then,
[Guest]: and a bit of consumer data. And he uses that data to sort of come up with, you know, broad
[Guest]: theories around stated and revealed preferences about institutionalized racism, that sort
[Guest]: of stuff, you know, how much less likely people are to match or look for people of African
[Guest]: American men, for example, that sort of stuff. And he too grapples with this in the book,
[Guest]: which is that the standard way is to start with a story of the person, but he says, I'm
[Guest]: not going to do this, I'm going to let the data speak for itself. And that's a bold choice.
[Guest]: And yeah, it's a thought experiment to, it's worth thinking about what the book would have
[Guest]: been like without these as well, which is being totally honest to the data and where
[Guest]: the stories needed that complication, bringing that in, but not otherwise sort of very instrumentally
[Guest]: thinking about humanize, humanize, which is the feedback a lot of people working with
[Guest]: data always get.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I think the danger, like you mentioned earlier about how a particular approach can
[Amit Varma]: become like a formula or a template. And in that case, like if there is an approach, always
[Amit Varma]: start with a story, then that kind of humanizing is actually dehumanizing in one way. And the
[Amit Varma]: other thing that kind of strikes me is that, you know, when you start with a story, you
[Amit Varma]: might achieve the short term end of making that particular piece that you're writing
[Amit Varma]: more compelling for the reader. But if your long term aim is to inculcate not a specific
[Amit Varma]: narrative, but a specific attitude in the reader that this is how I read data, this
[Amit Varma]: is my process of looking at this kind of work, then you're not actually working towards them,
[Amit Varma]: you're taking them away from that by kind of spoon feeding them. So would you say that's
[Guest]: also the case?
[Guest]: Yeah. And I also think of this because I think one of the sort of imperatives around me working
[Guest]: in data and perhaps in a way also the growth of the data journalism field in India came
[Guest]: in some ways as a response to political reporting. Because forget party political reporting,
[Guest]: which anyway is, you know, an embarrassment. Even electoral reporting, the typical sort
[Guest]: of formula was to parachute into a constituency and speak to three people and say that this
[Guest]: is how this one will vote, that one will vote. And the idea was that data can take you some
[Guest]: steps away from that and you're being a bit more faithful to what the broader trend is
[Guest]: rather than just the three people you chose to speak to under the people tree are saying.
[Guest]: But if I go back to bringing in a story, then am I essentially going back to that, which
[Guest]: is that I'm bringing in the one person that I chose to speak to. Sure, I can reassure
[Guest]: myself that this is a person who is sort of either an archetype or an outlier in the data
[Guest]: field and that is why they have been chosen. Yeah, but again, that's the thing that I grapple
[Guest]: with, which is, am I then going back to exactly what I was trying to resist in electoral reporting
[Guest]: by this sort of manipulative formula and all of the highly subjective choices that it involves.
[Amit Varma]: And you referred to a dataclism that got me to thinking about another book by Seth Stephens
[Amit Varma]: Davidovitz called Everybody Lies. Have you read it?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And what he does in it is he looks at search data because his premise, which I kind of
[Amit Varma]: agree with, is that people are most truly themselves when they are searching for things
[Amit Varma]: on the internet because nobody's watching them and therefore there's no filter. And
[Amit Varma]: he got obviously anonymized search data from Google and I think some others and he found
[Amit Varma]: really interesting things about it from there. Like, for example, the one that kind of blew
[Amit Varma]: me away, which I could not figure out, which just completely blindsided me, was that if
[Amit Varma]: you look at the Google search, the number, like when you type out a particular phrase,
[Amit Varma]: a Google search will autocomplete it for you by country so you know what the popular autocompletes
[Amit Varma]: are. And if you type my husband wants dot dot dot, the most popular autocomplete in
[Amit Varma]: India is my husband wants me to breastfeed him. And the second most is my husband wants
[Amit Varma]: me to breastfeed his friends. And there is this obsession with, you know, breastfeeding,
[Amit Varma]: which is quote, four times higher in India and Bangladesh than in any other country in
[Amit Varma]: the world, stop quote. And I could not for the life of me understand that, or even come
[Amit Varma]: out with a candidate explanation for this. But what this and what a lot of other counter
[Amit Varma]: intuitive insights in that book kind of told me is that we know nothing, we think we know
[Amit Varma]: so much. But you just take a slightly closer look at data. And we really know nothing about
[Amit Varma]: what people are like. And it also struck me again there. And I thought of asking you about
[Amit Varma]: this, because it struck me that a lot of the data you're working with is kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: government agencies are coming up with data, private agencies are coming up with data is
[Amit Varma]: data that's out there, you know, a lot of it is data that's, you know, all these national
[Amit Varma]: surveys and all that there are sampling issues, there are issues of how do you frame the question,
[Amit Varma]: how do you present the question. And it seems to me that with these private companies, which
[Amit Varma]: are like, our lives are so embedded within them, or rather, they are so embedded in the
[Amit Varma]: way we live our lives, that a lot of you don't need to ask anything or look for a sample,
[Amit Varma]: there is just so much rich data that is so indicative. So, you know, what are your thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on this? Do you think in the future, you'll be looking at such data more and more? Do
[Guest]: you already look at such data? The example first of all made me think of the other sort
[Guest]: of non data place that you get in a window into how people really think and which always
[Guest]: makes you feel like that's what people are thinking, which is this Mahindra Vatsa's sex
[Amit Varma]: questions column in Mumbai Mirror, I think it used to be or Midday. No, no, it used to
[Amit Varma]: be in Mumbai Mirror. And, and recently, I was clearing out my dad's house of all his
[Amit Varma]: books and all of that. And somewhere I found, you know, old magazines from the 1960s. And
[Amit Varma]: I came across this excellent feature on Mahindra Vatsa from a 1992 issue of fantasy. Do you
[Amit Varma]: remember fantasy? No, no, it was like Debonair. It was one of those Indian soft porn magazines.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so and there was actually a picture of Mahindra Vatsa in that when he was young,
[Guest]: which leads you to the realization that he was once young. Yeah, so that's the I mean,
[Guest]: very similar question. In fact, I'm pretty sure I've read a breastfeeding question multiple
[Guest]: times in that column as well. So there's really there's something going on there for sure,
[Guest]: which, of course, Mahindra Vatsa has captured. Yeah, so, so there's a few in the defense
[Guest]: of old school data, I would say that there are some things that well done household surveys
[Guest]: can capture that you would imagine, you know, that they're too sort of old school to get
[Guest]: at otherwise, you know, just the very fact that we have data on, and I'm sure it's underestimations,
[Guest]: but we have data from household surveys on the experience of physical and sexual violence
[Guest]: in women's lives from a government survey. This comes from the National Family Health
[Guest]: Survey, which is definitely one of the hardest questions to ask. And the fact that, you know,
[Guest]: overtime enumerators have been trained to ask that question and get some estimates at
[Guest]: least which are far in excess of what reported data is. So at least that shows you while
[Guest]: those might be underestimates, they at least take our understanding of officially reported
[Guest]: data forward. So I would have some defense of these sort of surveys. I'd also say that
[Guest]: there's a couple of privately done surveys, including the India Human Development Survey,
[Guest]: which will now soon have its new round, as well as the Lok surveys that were done a few
[Guest]: years ago, which do do things like ask questions about, you know, the experience and the practice
[Guest]: of caste based practices of attitudes to gender, which are which are ones that, you know, they're
[Guest]: difficult questions and they do get and again, triangulating data takes you forward, which
[Guest]: is like you might say that jobs is the number one thing you're voting for. However, if you're
[Guest]: simultaneously also saying, as people do in the Lok survey, that 45% of respondents would
[Guest]: want an MP of the same caste, it goes to say something about your sort of caste list response
[Guest]: that you want, you're voting for jobs alone. And by putting those sources of data together,
[Guest]: you do get at something more. In the sort of final writing of the book, I made some
[Guest]: final pushes to getting data from some of these, some of these companies that have so
[Guest]: much of our data. Now, I will say a couple, first of all, I didn't get it, I will say
[Guest]: a couple of things. One is that these are not nationally representative sources of data,
[Guest]: because, you know, if you are online in India, you're much likely to be male, Hindu, upper
[Guest]: caste, all of those things, of course, they can be corrected. And it's only going to get
[Guest]: more representative as time goes by. But you know, these aren't sort of, they do not yet
[Guest]: replace broad national surveys for these reasons. I find it very worrying that the only data
[Guest]: that comes out from them is so heavily curated, it comes like literally as a press release,
[Guest]: you'll never really get data from, from any of those. And when I, I suppose when I see
[Guest]: a dataclism or another book like that, you think that perhaps in other countries, they
[Guest]: are beginning to sort of give some of this anonymized data out, at least in a very specific
[Guest]: way to some people, who they can be largely sure will not have terrible things to say.
[Guest]: So people have asked me if I feel that just as I make demands of the government to do
[Guest]: a better job in putting out data, if there should be a greater movement towards asking
[Guest]: these companies to do a better job of putting out our anonymized data. And I don't know,
[Guest]: I mean, I would love it, I would love to have access to it and use it and talk more about
[Guest]: it. But I think that ship of entitlement to them has sailed long ago for all sorts of
[Guest]: things. So it's a pretty faint hope right now that, that, that me or other researchers
[Guest]: will get this data in any sort of fair and you know, no strings attached fashion to use.
[Guest]: So yeah, I do feel like I'm missing out on a lot by not being able to even just any one
[Guest]: of them, either Google or Facebook, if I had more access to the data, there's a lot I would
[Guest]: love to say. Occasionally, there's some sources, you know, some data that I've used in the
[Guest]: past, for example, from ad preferences, because Facebook based on your activity, plots you
[Guest]: into some ad categories. And then, so it's interesting to think of what Facebook thinks
[Guest]: of you. And through that, I was able to get you know, some sort of some, they even classify
[Guest]: you as liberal or conservative. And then you can, you can see where I maybe put out the
[Guest]: I had written something about how you can go about figuring whether Facebook thinks
[Guest]: you're liberal or not, and see it for yourself. And then I had got some sort of summary statistics
[Guest]: on what how they classified the majority of the country. But yeah, not not got much further
[Guest]: than that. And let me just like, put out a fond hope into the ether, which is that if
[Guest]: anonymized data could be put out, there's there is so much that people in the journalistic
[Guest]: and research fraternities could use to say about the way the country is changing. And
[Guest]: if, if someone reads the book and feels that it has a, you know, more sort of state data,
[Guest]: old fashioned bias, and would like to know more about the new India, then, then these
[Guest]: people should just share more of the data. It doesn't have it doesn't, you know, it,
[Guest]: it can be pretty agnostic in that, in that respect. So yeah, I'd love to, I'd really
[Guest]: love to have more access to this data. And my fear is that it's going to be sort of given
[Guest]: in curated fashion to to people who they think, you know, people in the pink press or somewhere
[Guest]: who they think will do like the job that they want them to do of it. So yeah, not much hope,
[Guest]: but I would love to have it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I mean, I'm just thinking about, you know, we of course have to ask the government
[Amit Varma]: for data, because, you know, they're supposed to be our servants, we are entitled to that.
[Amit Varma]: That's not exactly the case with these big companies, because it's voluntary association.
[Amit Varma]: But if I was running one of these companies, I would on my own, give as much anonymized
[Amit Varma]: data as I could, not just to researchers or to, you know, specific professions, but just
[Amit Varma]: put it out there. Because who knows what some 18 year old kid using the data in a creative
[Amit Varma]: way could find, which could in one way be life saving for people, which could, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just provide so many insights. So if, you know, senior people from any of those companies
[Amit Varma]: are listening to this, kindly give all your data to Rukmini and me.
[Guest]: APIs for all, that really should be what we ask of them.
[Amit Varma]: APIs for all. Can this ever be a popular movement? Who knows? Last year, people were waving copies
[Amit Varma]: of the preamble out in the street. So maybe APIs for all could also be a rallying cry.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of now get on to your first chapter. Now, I was very intrigued by like, number
[Amit Varma]: one, I love all your 10 chapters, and how they tackle different aspects of what we believe,
[Amit Varma]: what we eat, how much we earn, where we spend, all of that. But you started with how India
[Amit Varma]: tangles with cops and courts, and specifically with the problem of rape, which I found fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And this, in fact, had the most counterintuitive insights for me. And of course, I should know
[Amit Varma]: this, if for no other reason than you actually spoke about it in the last conversation we
[Amit Varma]: did together. But despite that, just reading about it again, and reading about it in the
[Amit Varma]: granular detail that you laid out, was sort of a revelation for me. And of course, you
[Amit Varma]: begin the chapter with the story of Seema and Sameer, you know, young people fall in
[Amit Varma]: love and they run away, and then the family catches them, take the girl back, they file
[Amit Varma]: a case against a boy, and that becomes a rape and kidnapping case. And then you go on to
[Amit Varma]: say, quote, official statistics often misreport non-criminal activity as crime, intentionally
[Amit Varma]: use wrong sections of the law to book some crimes, and significantly undercount a vast
[Amit Varma]: range of typically non-violent crime, stop quote. And it's eye opening because not only
[Amit Varma]: does it teach us that we need to look at rape statistics differently, that not all is as
[Amit Varma]: it seems on the surface. But it also tells me that the greatest source of violence against
[Amit Varma]: women is actually their own families of birth, and not necessarily strangers and people who
[Amit Varma]: abducted them. And it also kind of, in another very counterintuitive way, shows you that
[Amit Varma]: the laws that came after Nirbhaya, like in 2012, the harsh rape laws that came and then
[Amit Varma]: the stringent amendment in 2013, actually, in many cases had unintended consequences
[Amit Varma]: which made life worse for women. So this whole chapter to me, is, you know, completely eye
[Amit Varma]: opening. So tell me about how you started sort of questioning the obvious, intuitive,
[Amit Varma]: common assumptions about the subject that are there, and how you gradually got deeper
[Amit Varma]: and deeper into the story and discovered all that you did.
[Guest]: Yeah, so, so it comes back to Bombay, which is that when my first four years working in
[Guest]: journalism were in Bombay, and all newspapers, and I don't know if they have them the same
[Guest]: way at the time, but all newspapers had a day shift and a night shift reporter. So when
[Guest]: you were on the night shift, your job was to come into office, and imagine what pleasure
[Guest]: that was on the locals to be coming in at four o'clock to office. Then you ordered yourself
[Guest]: a lovely meal from Pratap Lunch Home in town. And then you had to be on the phone with,
[Guest]: with cops and the fire stations every hour on the hour, and ask them what was going on
[Guest]: and sort of hope against hope that a crime would be committed somewhere in the city and
[Guest]: you would have something to do that day. And yeah, it became, you know, it became important
[Guest]: also to to develop sources to become chatty with people. At that time, I used to use my
[Guest]: full name, which is my last name is Srinivasan, which is a very Tamil sounding name, thanks
[Guest]: to my father. But since I grew up in Pune, and my mother's Maharashtrian, I speak Marathi.
[Guest]: So the cops would always be struck with this sort of contrast between my name and my Marathi.
[Guest]: So that would usually sort of start a conversation. Then there would always be a photographer
[Guest]: assigned with us at the time and they all had bikes. So sometimes we'd just say, okay,
[Guest]: let's just go to like D N Nagar or one of the happening police stations where a lot
[Guest]: of crime happens and see, see if something comes up. So you end up spending hours there
[Guest]: around police stations. You end up spending a lot of time with crime reporters who do
[Guest]: this all day, in fact, and, you know, have great stories. And you see how, how police
[Guest]: stations operate. You see the sort of backstory behind a family coming to the police station.
[Guest]: You see the process that an FIR, that getting the FIR down on paper requires all of that.
[Guest]: And so you, you can't anymore see an FIR as a state, straight statement of fact. And so
[Guest]: one of the things that happened in 2012, I lived in Delhi at the time and I too found,
[Guest]: I found the city aggressive having lived in, you know, Western India most of my life, I
[Guest]: found it aggressive. I was very unnerved by how few working women I saw out on the street.
[Guest]: I was so used to in Bombay seeing this huge, you know, army of women get off the ladies
[Guest]: compartment with you. Even at four o'clock they'd all be heading into work or at one
[Guest]: when you were heading back on the last local, there'd be nurses, you know, happily alone
[Guest]: in the train. So I did sense all of that about Delhi and it did scare me in those ways. But
[Guest]: what I felt that I was seeing in the news after 2012 didn't seem to have a sort of direct
[Guest]: grounding in reality. And I knew that a lot of this was sort of uncritical reproduction
[Guest]: of FIRs. I could tell even in the language that was being used that although these were
[Guest]: probably in Hindi and I was more used to Rati FIRs, you could tell the sort of scripting
[Guest]: that was going on in the writing of those. And I wanted just for myself to try and figure
[Guest]: out something more than what the NCRB data, which is a collection of FIRs could alone
[Guest]: tell me. And I just, you know, want to reiterate that by no means is judicial data a sort of,
[Guest]: you know, ultimate end. It just takes you one step further than police statistics. So
[Guest]: I don't want to give a sort of veneer of scientific certainty to what I was able to find from
[Guest]: this, just a little more than what the FIR tells you. And I started, I thought that the
[Guest]: best way to do this would be to look at one calendar year of sexual assault trials in
[Guest]: Delhi's district courts, because then that would tell me a little more than what, and
[Guest]: sort of try and trace the journey from the FIR to what ended up happening at the end
[Guest]: of the court case. And at that time, I found many in the judicial system quite easy to
[Guest]: talk to. I could speak to public prosecutors and cops. And I even found judges quite keen
[Guest]: to speak then, partly because they were getting such a bad rap for low conviction rates. So
[Guest]: they were very keen to sort of explain their process and show me the evidence that was
[Guest]: coming in front of them and sort of ask me in this, you know, very wrong tones, would
[Guest]: you be able to convict someone on the basis of this? Of course, not to say that they didn't.
[Guest]: Many of them have extremely misogynist and patriarchal views themselves. So there is
[Guest]: that element to it as well. And yeah, so the minute I began to see this sort of story coming
[Guest]: in again and again, which parents going to all sorts of lengths to recover couples who
[Guest]: had had, who had run away, who had eloped essentially, and that both, both rape and
[Guest]: kidnapping IPC sections were the ones being used there. Having seen it happen repeatedly
[Guest]: and with the same script, I could see what was happening there. And then did the same
[Guest]: process for Mumbai and also for Madhya Pradesh. And then, you know, it became pretty clear
[Guest]: to me that, and you know, I didn't even need to do all of that. You literally needed
[Guest]: to speak to like two cops, one judge and two women's rights activists. And they all said,
[Guest]: yes, this is what we're seeing again. I recently spoke with a bunch of people doing
[Guest]: legal work. And some of them, lawyers too said how they were so used to while waiting
[Guest]: for their own cases to come up, seeing this sort of case, usually a bail application come
[Guest]: up. So they too knew how common this was in the courts. I think this is one of those cases
[Guest]: in which I sort of grappled with the knowledge that what was coming out from this data didn't
[Guest]: necessarily support my sort of worldview. And it made me worry that it was a sort of,
[Guest]: that it was traitorous to the feminist cause to be saying these things. But the more I
[Guest]: sat with it, the more I, first of all, I knew that this has to be told. And also I could
[Guest]: see that I was worried that this would add to the narrative of most rape cases are actually
[Guest]: false cases foisted on men. But that isn't exactly what was going on. I mean, there were
[Guest]: false cases being foisted on both men and women. The men were the accused and I don't
[Guest]: want to minimize at all what they went through. The women were also being put in government
[Guest]: shelter homes, often subjected to violence, forced abortions, all sorts of horrific behavior
[Guest]: being enacted on them by their parents. So yeah, having seen this trend repeated across
[Guest]: jurisdictions, seeing it in the data and on the ground, I felt like this is something
[Guest]: that really needs to be told. That the view of the country, of our own safety, the limits
[Guest]: that we're placing on ourselves, the comparisons between areas and states that we're making
[Guest]: based on this data, is very damaging. And I agree that a lot of what has happened in
[Guest]: the legal sphere since 2012 has also been deeply damaging for women. It's damaging for
[Guest]: all of the male accused and what they have gone through and their families. It's also
[Guest]: been damaging I think for the agency of women and for all of their freedoms. And I look
[Guest]: back with a lot of sense of sort of collective shame in the conversation that happened post
[Guest]: 2012 and a feeling of failure that we could not sort of lower the volume on the way the
[Guest]: discussion was happening then. Whether it was in terms of making stricter laws, also
[Guest]: in terms of removing discretion from judges, which is one of the things that happened then.
[Guest]: And the sort of reporting around it then was that judges were being patriarchal and telling
[Guest]: people, oh just get married to each other. The reason that was happening is because these
[Guest]: were people in relationships. And the judge was trying to protect the man from a statutory
[Guest]: rape sentence and instead saying, okay, as soon as she's 18, you can get married. And
[Guest]: you know, so yeah, that discretion was removed. That I think was extremely damaging. I think
[Guest]: the raising of the age of consent of women from 16 to 18 was deeply damaging because
[Guest]: what it has ended up doing is criminalizing teenage sexual relationships. And this is
[Guest]: something that work by the lawyer and activist Bharti Ali of Haq has repeatedly shown has
[Guest]: been a big problem with POXO cases in Mumbai that they looked at, which is that there too
[Guest]: they found that a very large and growing share of POXO cases were again consenting teenage
[Guest]: relationships. So that's again, you know, and these things are very hard to undo. I
[Guest]: mean, who is going to lower the age of consent for women in the country? That's gone now.
[Guest]: That's not going to, that's unfixable now, you know. And once you set those, it really
[Guest]: became competitive. Like, you know, then who was going to argue for the death penalty?
[Guest]: Who was going to argue for minimum sentences of 10 years? And you know, state governments
[Guest]: have gone on to make even harsher laws themselves say that there should be a death penalty in
[Guest]: POXO cases where again, now that we know that there's so much teenage sexual activity that's
[Guest]: being criminalized under POXO. So yeah, I think it was a truly damaging period. I mean,
[Guest]: a lot of good came about it in terms of keeping the rights of women to public spaces at the
[Guest]: center of it. You know, Kavita Krishnan, who you've had on and who has led a lot of this
[Guest]: championing the right of women to public spaces in Delhi, for example, that was an important
[Guest]: conversation. And I think feminists like her kept the sexual and other agency of women
[Guest]: central to the issue instead of allowing others to convert it into a hide women more, keep
[Guest]: them out of colleges, keep them out of workforce sort of sentiment. It's because of them that
[Guest]: it didn't go in that direction entirely. But yeah, I do, I feel very regretful of what
[Guest]: has happened in the legal space since 2012. And a bit of sort of collective shame that
[Guest]: we all allowed it to happen on our watch. And we weren't able to persuade MPs well enough
[Guest]: that these were very bad and damaging laws to be passing. And again, I want to, you know,
[Guest]: reiterate that none of this is sort of agnostic to other factors. And the sharp edge of all
[Guest]: of this is the rampant and growing Islamophobia in this country. And the sharp edge of these
[Guest]: laws is going to hang over Muslims the most. And one of the things that I saw in the data
[Guest]: then itself was that, it was particularly a problem in inter-caste and inter-religious
[Guest]: marriages. And I cannot but see how there's going to be an increase in the number of Muslim
[Guest]: accused in these sorts of cases, because it gives people seeking to go after inter-caste
[Guest]: and inter-religious marriages yet another sort of tool with the veneer of legality.
[Guest]: So yeah, we've done so much damage to the agency and the sexual agency of young people
[Guest]: in the last, in the nearly 10 years since the Delhi attack.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I want to quickly summarize for my listeners some of what I found so eye-opening
[Amit Varma]: and insightful. One is you examined rape cases in Delhi, Bombay. In one of your studies you
[Amit Varma]: found that out of 460 cases, as many as 189 dealt with cases involving or allegedly involving
[Amit Varma]: consenting adults. A majority of these, 174 out of the 189 cases, involved couples like
[Amit Varma]: Seema and Sameer who seem to have eloped, after which parents usually of the woman filed
[Amit Varma]: complaints of abduction and rape with the police. Many of them involved inter-caste
[Amit Varma]: or inter-religious relationships. And this is problematic for a number of reasons. Like
[Amit Varma]: for example, you talk about the 2012 laws and the result of that, and you talk about
[Amit Varma]: how even if the couple could subsequently prove that the woman was 18 at the time, the
[Amit Varma]: family, by using that provision at the age of consenting, would have gotten the couple
[Amit Varma]: separated, the male partner arrested, and the woman either back in a parent's custody
[Amit Varma]: or in a state-run shelter home. So most of these FIRs, as you've pointed out, would say
[Amit Varma]: the young woman was between 15 and 18 and the court would have to decide. And in 20,
[Amit Varma]: the 2013 amendment took away the discretion of judges there. So even if judges were sympathetic,
[Amit Varma]: they could not do anything about it. And as you point out, the move placed young men in
[Amit Varma]: romantic relationships with young women in the same category as pedophiles. And the other
[Amit Varma]: aspect that you point out in your book is because one of the Nirbhaya rapists was a
[Amit Varma]: juvenile and people were shocked. You know, there was a law that they could be tried as
[Amit Varma]: adults, you know, made with that particular boy in mind who was so brutal. And the result
[Amit Varma]: of that, as you point out, is, quote, if a 17-year-old boy indulges in a consensual sexual
[Amit Varma]: act with a 15-and-a-half-year-old girl, he can now be tried as an adult for rape and
[Amit Varma]: kidnapping in a court which will have no option but to sentence him to a minimum of 10 years
[Amit Varma]: in prison, stop quote. And the keywords here are consensual sexual act, and the court will
[Amit Varma]: have no option, which, you know, makes the whole situation completely bizarre. And what
[Amit Varma]: I was also struck by is this para which I'll read out where you talk about where the real
[Amit Varma]: violence on women is coming from, where you write, quote, in case after case, as well
[Amit Varma]: as in interviews with me, the behavior of the families of these young consenting women
[Amit Varma]: was shocking. They arrived at the hotel or friend's house a couple had eloped to and
[Amit Varma]: dragged them home. They beat and even injured the couple, in one case breaking the young
[Amit Varma]: woman's spine. They threatened their own daughters and nieces with acid. They forced them to
[Amit Varma]: submit to invasive medical tests, and in many cases, even to an abortion. Young women deposed
[Amit Varma]: about the suffering they faced at the hands of their parents, beatings, confinements,
[Amit Varma]: threats, being forced to undergo medical examinations, being forced to undergo abortions. Even as
[Amit Varma]: they pleaded before the court, they'd be allowed to stay with their husbands. There are undoubtedly
[Amit Varma]: crimes taking place against the women here, but not the ones that are being prosecuted
[Amit Varma]: by the state. Stop quote. I have a couple of questions here. And the first one here
[Amit Varma]: is this that were you able to report this and be taken seriously because partly because
[Amit Varma]: you were a woman, because I imagine if any male reporter had spoke, you know, made the
[Amit Varma]: case that these laws aren't working and whatever, or tried to argue on any of these grounds
[Amit Varma]: that many of these rape cases aren't rape, you know, that, you know, they could be accused
[Amit Varma]: of having an agenda, they could be accused of, you know, being, quote, unquote, men's
[Amit Varma]: rights campaigners, and so on and so forth. So, you know, did your being a woman who was
[Amit Varma]: who also had credibility as a serious journalist, did that make it easier for you? And what
[Amit Varma]: was you know, you mentioned somewhere at the start of this episode that feminists engaged
[Amit Varma]: with these ideas seriously, and they took it into account and they were willing to reconsider
[Amit Varma]: their notions. But how much pushback was there at the start? And like you said, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can't put the genie back in the bottle. And even now we have this whole thing about
[Amit Varma]: the marriage age of women being raised to 21, which in context of what you've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: some of the data you have here on what, in any case, the age at which women are getting
[Amit Varma]: married just makes no sense. You're just, you know, changing the law as an act of posturing
[Amit Varma]: or whatever it is. So, you know, tell me about your experience with kind of reporting this
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So, on the first question of, I'm just going to jump in with one sort of modification,
[Guest]: which is that the juvenile in the Nirbhaya case, the media reporting decided that he
[Guest]: was the most brutal. And that is, that, you know, led a lot of the push towards these
[Guest]: changes in laws that dealt with juvenile offenders. But subsequent reporting by journalists who
[Guest]: accessed, you know, the juvenile board decisions and that sort of stuff. And, you know, these
[Guest]: are, of course, degrees of violence. They were all convicted and so let's all accept
[Guest]: that they did all commit the crime. But the singling out of him as the most brutal, which
[Guest]: some of the media did, did not necessarily have basis in fact. And I strongly believe
[Guest]: that part of the reason for that is because he was, is Muslim. That aspect was released
[Guest]: to the media and, you know, used repeatedly. You'll even see it on social media. It's still
[Guest]: used. So, while it might feel like a particularly gruesome thing to be comparing the degrees
[Guest]: of brutality of men who were convicted for a crime, put to death, some of them, for a
[Guest]: crime in which a young woman was, you know, horribly assaulted and murdered. It does matter
[Guest]: to make that gruesome distinction because of the weaponization of that evidence, quote
[Guest]: unquote evidence, and because of what that did in the propaganda towards changing juvenile
[Guest]: laws. So, you know, since I know the consideration with which your listeners approach an argument
[Guest]: and, you know, from the beginning of the end to it, which is why I even feel able to sort
[Guest]: of make this point, because it is not a point that you can, you know, you can, you can jump
[Guest]: the gun and you can sort of misinterpret this entirely. But this is something that does
[Guest]: need to be said. I do, I think often that sometimes that being a woman helps me with
[Guest]: some aspects of reporting, partly because our socialization expects sensitivity, kindness
[Guest]: and an ability to listen from women. And that's helpful when it, when it's a journalist, because
[Guest]: you know, people do feel that you're going to respond like this, then, then that's great.
[Guest]: I also think it is possible that a male journalist writing this might have faced some pushback.
[Guest]: But I would like to believe that my fairness in accessing and reporting the data is what
[Guest]: led to it being taken seriously. And again, this is one of those cases in which I made
[Guest]: all of the summary data publicly available. I was at The Hindu at the time and my spreadsheet
[Guest]: in which I had sort of coded all of the data, we put it up online and as far as I know,
[Guest]: it's still sort of publicly available. So, I would like to think that all of those processes
[Guest]: led to why it was taken seriously. I think more, more than pushback against it was my
[Guest]: fear of there being pushback against it. But because I do think that anyone with any sort
[Guest]: of grassroots or ground level connect had encountered this already and was already worried
[Guest]: about what was being done to young people. So, you know, all of the feminists, feminist
[Guest]: lawyers who I spoke to, all of whom, you know, deal with these things, they were very admiring
[Guest]: of the effort taken to get this point out, that it wasn't just being done on the basis
[Guest]: of one or two cases and I had spent all of this time on it and felt that this was something
[Guest]: they were seeing. I was, however, sort of quietly cautioned by a couple of feminists
[Guest]: to think hard about how, what I was writing would be taken and then whether it was something
[Guest]: that I should do. And of course, I did do it. So, in that way, it did, you know, it
[Guest]: did remind me that when these sort of narratives are complicated, then not everybody feels
[Guest]: comfortable with that. One, one thing that did happen and probably continues to happen
[Guest]: is that there is a subset of people who use this study to say that the large majority
[Guest]: of rape cases in this country are actually false cases. I would not characterize this
[Guest]: study as saying that. And at some point, I have to absolve myself of, you know, the guilt
[Guest]: of feeling that this is what people are doing with it. I think in the initial days, I probably
[Guest]: even responded to each person who said that by saying this is what it's actually showing.
[Guest]: But the advantage of feeling that I did a sort of fair job of it is that I don't feel
[Guest]: obliged to continually defend, you know, the piece of work for it. And again, I feel thankful
[Guest]: that I was able to do it at the Hindu at the time, which let me do it over three parts
[Guest]: that ran on consecutive days, as well as put all of this data online. So, I didn't have
[Guest]: to compress all that I was saying. I could say it in its full, to its full extent. I
[Guest]: put out a lot of stories of the people that, you know, this was going on. So, I was able
[Guest]: to put all of that out. And, you know, when you were reading that portion about the violence
[Guest]: that women underwent, one of the things that it made me also think about is that we talk
[Guest]: often about the stigma of rape and what that means in terms of filing complaints. And of
[Guest]: course, it's, it's absolutely a fact. It's borne out, you know, by all sorts of other
[Guest]: things and anyone will, anyone who has been through it will tell you all of the terrible
[Guest]: sort of questioning in court that they've had to face, that sort of thing. But I do
[Guest]: also want to make the point that there is, that the stigma of your daughter choosing
[Guest]: her own partner can in some instances be even greater than the stigma of having a rape case
[Guest]: associated with your family, which is what all of these families were demonstrating that,
[Guest]: that was a shame that they could not tolerate. Because people ask me this, how would they
[Guest]: do this when they'll have the stigma of a rape case, you know, in their family. But,
[Guest]: you know, agency was the most dangerous thing of all. And that was the thing that, that
[Guest]: in any sort of form had to be pushed back against. And yeah, when you, when you talk
[Guest]: about the raising of the age of marriage, I have been thinking about this a lot for
[Guest]: the last couple of days. And I find it, I find it a little hard to place myself on one
[Guest]: side or the other of the debate, which is because, I think one of the things that's
[Guest]: happened and I find this through conversations is that the age of marriage being 18 means
[Guest]: that many families feel that, let the girl complete high school, because anyway she needs
[Guest]: to do something till she's 17, you don't want her just being at home alone in the
[Guest]: vasti early, you know, let her, and then she'll get married the next year, it'll
[Guest]: take that much time to set everything up. Maybe this will be a case of norm setting
[Guest]: in which the norm will then be set that she can't get married officially till she's
[Guest]: 21, so let her go to college. Anyway, you know, BA colleges are a dime a dozen, it's
[Guest]: not necessarily expensive. It could be a case that that norm setting changes. However, what
[Guest]: it means in terms of the weaponization of the law, particularly again against inter-caste
[Guest]: or inter-religious couples involving Muslims, which is where I feel, you know, the sharpest
[Guest]: edge of this will be felt, that's a big problem. But in and of itself, whether raising
[Guest]: the age of marriage to 21, if your aim is to set a norm that will encourage or force
[Guest]: families to send girls to college, I feel agnostic on that part of it, because I do
[Guest]: think that there is a role for norm setting through laws that exist.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's interesting. I mean, later in your book, you also speak about early marriages
[Amit Varma]: where you're referring to the marriage age of 18, and you write, quote, a quarter of
[Amit Varma]: newly married young women got married before the legal age and more than 10% of women had
[Amit Varma]: a child while still a minor. But overall, both men and women have been getting married
[Amit Varma]: later and later. Nearly half of married women now in their 40s were married by the time
[Amit Varma]: they were 18. But among women currently in the early 20s, that proportion is down to
[Amit Varma]: just 25%, stop quote. And what that seems to indicate is that the setting of the norm
[Amit Varma]: itself may be a lagging indicator in the sense that society is already changing and you're
[Amit Varma]: setting a law later, in which case I'm kind of, again, agnostic about that. I don't think
[Amit Varma]: you would be able to change society by setting a law in a top-down kind of way and hoping
[Amit Varma]: social norms change, but your data indicates they're already changing.
[Guest]: Right, but the norm setting of the age of marriage at 18 happened a long time ago. So
[Guest]: it's not entirely clear that that is a lagging indicator. In fact, you could argue that that
[Guest]: is what set the norm for these processes to take place in society, though I don't think
[Guest]: that that's true. I do think that as people get richer and better educated, these are
[Guest]: natural processes. And you see it in the case of fertility, for example. Nobody has needed
[Guest]: to do anything in India except for allow states to get richer, allow women better access to
[Guest]: education and health. And then for perfectly rational reasons, everyone has limited their
[Guest]: family size when health outcomes for women and for babies improve. And in fact, what
[Guest]: we have seen in states where there have been either financial incentives or coercive measures
[Guest]: like not allowing people to contest local body elections is that this has worsened the
[Guest]: sex ratio. So you have had horrible unintended consequences. So again, all of this is a great
[Guest]: argument against setting a two-child law because these processes are anyway happening and setting
[Guest]: laws can have these sort of dangerous consequences. So that is the argument that I could extend
[Guest]: to the 21 years of age, which is that these things will happen anyway and putting in place
[Guest]: a law just gives people a stick with which to beat Muslims further. So as I said, I feel
[Guest]: like I can argue this both ways. I feel a bit agnostic about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. In fact, earlier you also speak about how a lot of these laws are being used for
[Amit Varma]: purposes of fighting love jihad. Like you speak about how a Muslim man was arrested
[Amit Varma]: for meeting a Hindu girl on a pizza date, right? And much as sugar is poison and carbs
[Amit Varma]: are not good for you, pizza date should not be criminalized in that matter. And again
[Amit Varma]: you wrote there, quote, once again, there is a crime taking place here, just not the
[Amit Varma]: one that is being reported, stop quote. Now I have a couple of questions for you coming
[Amit Varma]: from this. And one of them is that how much do you find that attitude of women being the
[Amit Varma]: property of men still persists? Like a lot of it was even hard-coded in our laws. Like
[Amit Varma]: the adultery law was struck down, I think a couple of years back and which was of course
[Amit Varma]: part of the IPC, which came from the British, but it also, I think embodied a common Indian
[Amit Varma]: attitude. And what the law said was, quote, whoever has sexual intercourse with a person
[Amit Varma]: who is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of another man without
[Amit Varma]: the consent or connivence of that man, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot, therefore indicating that
[Amit Varma]: if you want to have sex with a woman, the consent of her owner is needed, whether it
[Amit Varma]: be father or man. And, you know, and there are other laws in the IPC, like 408, you know,
[Amit Varma]: enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman, which are
[Amit Varma]: exactly like that. And it seems to me that a lot of even these kind of cases, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like you pointed out that even though people don't want to admit to rape, because it carries
[Amit Varma]: a social stigma, at the same time, they don't want to admit also to their daughter running
[Amit Varma]: away with someone else, you know, and that also carries a stigma. And it's like someone
[Amit Varma]: stole your property from you, which is, you know, seems to be driving so much of this
[Amit Varma]: love jihad hatred as well. It's not only the other, but the other is taking away something
[Amit Varma]: that kind of belongs to you. And in your later chapter on how India thinks and believes and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, or one of the things that you've, there's lots of pretty stunning data on is
[Amit Varma]: that India is not just conservative in the words you use, but I'd also say in many ways
[Amit Varma]: regressive, that many women also have these attitudes, that that it is okay for their
[Amit Varma]: husband to beat them and to discipline them, and all of that. So do you find that these
[Amit Varma]: are also kind of gradually changing in different ways? And obviously, I'm not necessarily just
[Amit Varma]: asking about this from a data point of view, but as a journalist point of view that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you've been around, spoken to people, what's your sense?
[Guest]: So there's no greater example of this consideration of women as property than the fact that a
[Guest]: marriage exception exists in India's rape laws, where if it's okay, and especially given
[Guest]: that we know from household surveys, that 97.7, nearly 98% of the sexual violence women
[Guest]: face is from their husbands. So if you feel in this country that you have to do something
[Guest]: about sexual violence, but you are not criminalizing the vast majority of actual sexual violence,
[Guest]: precisely because you believe that within marriage, whatever you do is fine, I mean,
[Guest]: there's no greater example of this property aspect than the fact that this absolutely
[Guest]: unconscionable law continues to exist in India. It's such a massive national shame that we
[Guest]: still have this.
[Guest]: So the violence and the disciplining of women indicator is, I think, one indicator that
[Guest]: has over time shown some decline. And I do think that going forward, that is something
[Guest]: we are going to see some change in. I also think in terms of what people feel that it's
[Guest]: acceptable to say, either in the media or to surveyors, I do see the needle shifting
[Guest]: in terms of what it's acceptable to say about women. So if you see sort of across the board,
[Guest]: right leaning, left leaning media outrage about something an MP says, you'll usually
[Guest]: see it about something they say about women. There's a bit of unity in terms of you can't
[Guest]: say this. There is absolutely not that unity when it comes to saying Islamophobic things.
[Guest]: The majority now of television media, for example, Hindi media for sure, and a lot of
[Guest]: English media as well, will not push back against an MP saying something or a prime
[Guest]: minister saying something Islamophobic. So I do think that there has been some needle
[Guest]: shifting in terms of what people feel it's okay to say. The worrying one is when it comes
[Guest]: to labor force participation and sort of economic participation as such. And I was on a conversation
[Guest]: recently in which the political scientist Milan Vaishnav was on this, and he had a question
[Guest]: to ask of me from the data to which I don't have a great response, but I have been thinking
[Guest]: about it, which is that he says that my data shows this impressive sort of political empowerment
[Guest]: of women that has happened. You know, all of the, almost all of the increase in voter
[Guest]: turnout in the last 30 years has come exclusively through women. Male voter turnout has not
[Guest]: really moved much. So if you do believe that this is a political empowerment of women,
[Guest]: that they do feel, you know, they have been made to feel part of the political process
[Guest]: in that respect, and even the physical act of actually coming out to vote, why is this
[Guest]: not translating into economic empowerment? Why are we not seeing labor force participation
[Guest]: numbers improve? And my sort of broad feeling is that that norm shifting in terms of not
[Guest]: feeling that the home is your primary responsibility and work is what you get to do on the side
[Guest]: before you have kids, that norm shifting has not happened. But that's not a full answer,
[Guest]: because why has that not happened if we are not able to, if we have had this sort of political
[Guest]: empowerment? So I'd say at least in terms of what a lot of people feel that it's acceptable
[Guest]: to say about women, that that is something that has changed. You know, we are still a
[Guest]: country in which a majority of people feel like, feel that it's okay to say that inter-caste
[Guest]: and inter-religious marriage should never happen. But I don't think that now it's okay
[Guest]: to say that women should never do paid work. You know, the majority don't feel that that's
[Guest]: okay to say, or that women shouldn't have the right to speak up, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So why that hasn't translated into economic empowerment and participation has in some
[Guest]: ways as much to say about the economy as it is about what's happening within homes, and
[Guest]: what it means in terms of the jobs that we are able to offer women, and the economist
[Guest]: Ashwini Deshpande and the demographer and scientist Sonal Desai, for example, have been
[Guest]: arguing of late that we need to think harder about supply side factors when it comes to
[Guest]: jobs for women. My sense is still that social norms around working is the biggest barrier
[Guest]: and that's the part that's not shifted. If I do see some needle having moved, I would
[Guest]: say this is probably the one, at least in terms of what is acceptable to say that I
[Guest]: do feel has moved.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I also recorded an episode a couple of a week back, in fact, with Shrayana Bhattacharya,
[Amit Varma]: the World Bank economist who's written an excellent book, which is not about Shah Rukh
[Amit Varma]: Khan, even though it might seem like that from the cover, where she, you know, in her
[Amit Varma]: book, she gives four reasons for why women's participation in the workforce has gone down.
[Amit Varma]: But by the time we discussed it in the episode, that became six reasons. So that was a great
[Amit Varma]: episode, which I'll link from the show notes. And again, to underscore what you said about
[Amit Varma]: women as property and marital rape, that effectively means that 98% of sexual violence committed
[Amit Varma]: against women in this country is legal.
[Guest]: Yes, it means exactly that.
[Amit Varma]: That is such a mind blowing statement. That is, you know, it should be on billboards because
[Amit Varma]: that is just completely nuts. My other question is this, so you haven't written about it in
[Amit Varma]: your book, you've written about love and marriage, but not about sex. And I once asked a friend
[Amit Varma]: of mine, you know, with how many, in his estimate, how many people has the median Indian man
[Amit Varma]: had sex with? And I don't think he understood my question properly, because he said 1.6.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things that kind of strikes me when I think about many of the problems
[Amit Varma]: in our society is, I wonder how many of them are because of the sexual repression of men.
[Amit Varma]: Like even a lot of the data in Everybody Lies, the book we were discussing, Seth Stephens
[Amit Varma]: Davidowitz, I wish he had a shorter name, kind of indicate the sexual frustrations and
[Amit Varma]: even perversities of men, who are we to judge? And how much of this anger and resentment
[Amit Varma]: comes from there? Like, you align this with the notion that women are our property. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, you put that together with the fact that young Indian men are not getting enough
[Amit Varma]: action for whatever reason, and how much of their resentment and anger comes from there?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, do you have any thoughts on this? You know, does any of your data have indications
[Amit Varma]: to this effect?
[Guest]: Yeah, so we definitely don't have great data about sex, but we do have some from a series
[Guest]: of surveys called the Demographic and Health Surveys that are done all over the world.
[Guest]: And I was just looking at the book to see if I put it in, but you know, one of the things
[Guest]: which I have used in other work that I've done around data around sex is that Indians
[Guest]: for the large part have sex after they get married. Their first experience of sex is
[Guest]: post-marriage. And of course, there's got to be some amount of social acceptability
[Guest]: bias in what you tell surveyors. And sure, there's some of it that must be getting missed.
[Guest]: So if you agree, it's not 99%, but say 95% or 90% discounting for some of, you know,
[Guest]: not telling surveyors that. The data, the internationally comparable data shows that
[Guest]: Indian men have sex the latest of any country in the world. I think about this number quite
[Guest]: often and I sometimes think about whether we aren't talking about this enough as a country.
[Guest]: And you know, the last thing that I would feel comfortable theorizing about is sexual
[Guest]: violence because it has, you know, complex roots and I have in the past felt very unhappy
[Guest]: and uncomfortable even with people who locate it within things like, you know, urban density
[Guest]: or poverty or sort of past experiences of violence. I don't think that these are direct
[Guest]: explanations and I don't feel very comfortable theorizing about that in the least at all.
[Guest]: But whether we are not, you know, even if the outcome that we're talking about is not
[Guest]: sexual violence, even if it is just for mental health or just the way you sort of deal with
[Guest]: the world, we should probably be talking about the fact that Indian men have their first
[Guest]: sexual experience the latest of men anywhere in the world. And Indian women, it also corresponds
[Guest]: very close to the age of marriage. So if we're talking about norm-setting, it's entirely
[Guest]: possible that in a few years the age of first experience of sex for women too will rise
[Guest]: considerably to levels that are much higher than in most of the rest of the world. Of
[Guest]: course it's one more of those things, just like I found that, you know, I did end up
[Guest]: thinking about whether data on marriage adequately captures the world of love, I do similarly
[Guest]: wonder about whether data on sex after marriage, which is what most of our official surveys
[Guest]: capture, because we do capture a lot of data about sex, including how often people have
[Guest]: sex and, you know, which is, you know, the majority of Indians have had sex either within
[Guest]: the last week or the last few weeks of national surveys being conducted. It's actually quite
[Guest]: amazing to me that we have all of this information, and even if it, you know, misses a lot, the
[Guest]: fact that we have a trained enumerator force that's able to ask these questions and get
[Guest]: some answer, whether it's, you know, semi-accurate or not, is one of those things that humbles
[Guest]: you about Indian data. And this is the National Family Health Survey that's been going on
[Guest]: for five decades, you know, it's not some sort of new source of data that's coming out
[Guest]: now or an online survey or something, which you feel is the only way you will get these
[Guest]: answers. So, I do too wonder about what we're missing about premarital sex just because
[Guest]: of the nature of the types of surveys. You know, if you're asking this question as part
[Guest]: of the National Family Health Survey, you're probably missing a lot of premarital sex.
[Guest]: And again, we need to think of this hard, not just because of the lives of young people
[Guest]: and their lives, their agency, their freedom to live their lives as they want, but also
[Guest]: because of what all of these, you know, repressive new laws that are coming up are going to mean
[Guest]: for all of this. You know, because if the norm is being set that the age, that sex is
[Guest]: something you only have after marriage, and then you raise the age of marriage, and then,
[Guest]: you know, you feel comfortable in filing sexual assault cases to anybody having sex before
[Guest]: marriage, then what is the sort of legal mess that we're creating for young people is something
[Amit Varma]: I worry about. Yeah, and like I had, you know, I'm probably
[Amit Varma]: the only person to ever have been trolled on Twitter with Urdu Shaari. I put out this
[Amit Varma]: playful tweet about how most Urdu poetry was the entitled whining of incels. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: people threw examples at me of how that's not the case. And we write about social issues
[Amit Varma]: and all that. It was quite delightful. That's a one time in my life. I'm glad that people
[Amit Varma]: responded to me with anger and they expressed it in verse. Yeah, let's you know, and I'm
[Amit Varma]: also there's an anecdote a friend of mine had told me when you know, back in our book
[Amit Varma]: in my poker playing days, we used to travel to Macau, Philippines and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: one of my friends got chatting with sex workers. And those people told him that they will go
[Amit Varma]: with anyone but they're worried about Indians because Indians are apparently the most incredibly
[Amit Varma]: violent. It's like in their words, I've never seen a woman before. And that really makes
[Amit Varma]: me wonder and I think this is perhaps an under appreciated factor for all the anger that
[Amit Varma]: is out there among our youth there and which need not be the case because you know, it's
[Guest]: you know, Srinath Perur has this book if it's Tuesday, it must be Madurai and one of the
[Guest]: it sort of follows travels of Indians within the country and around the world. Delightful
[Guest]: book absolutely love it. You know, the journey with the Varkaris is one of the most moving
[Guest]: bits of writing on modern India that I've read. And on one of his in one of the chapters,
[Guest]: he goes with a bunch of men, not all of them young men, some of them married too. I think
[Guest]: he intended to go to Uzbekistan but ends up in Thailand as far as I remember, with a bunch
[Guest]: of men who are basically there on a holiday to have sex with sex workers. And he, you
[Guest]: know, in the repression that he captures is so strong, that it's really terrifying to
[Guest]: think of what the sex workers are undergoing. He captures exactly the point that you've
[Guest]: made in the people he actually speaks to. So, yeah, that that I immediately thought
[Guest]: of that chapter and nobody reading that chapter would feel anything but serious fear for the
[Amit Varma]: sex workers these men have to encounter. Yeah, and typically you'd imagine that sex has everything
[Amit Varma]: to do with lust. And later you realize it has everything to do with power also. And
[Amit Varma]: here it has a lot to do with anger also, which kind of really is so disturbing. And Srinath
[Amit Varma]: of course, is a translator of Ghachar Ghochar by Vivek Shanbhag, which is just one of my
[Amit Varma]: favorite Indian novels of the last couple of decades, just a brilliant, brilliant book.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I was also sort of struck by your section on crime statistics in India. Like, first
[Amit Varma]: of all, you point out why it's important that, you know, accurate crime statistics can help
[Amit Varma]: the police, you know, figure out how to allocate resources, where to handle what kind of crime,
[Amit Varma]: comparative crime rates can spotlight regions where there is more or less crime. And you
[Amit Varma]: can then start figuring out why, why is something happening more in one place than another.
[Amit Varma]: And also crime statistics help the public, in your words, quote, form perceptions about
[Amit Varma]: a place's relative risks and take actions that might protect them. Young women in Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: for instance, are more likely to choose colleges that do not need them to take unsafe bus routes,
[Amit Varma]: even if they are of lower quality, stop quote. And you've pointed out a lot of problems with
[Amit Varma]: crime statistics, for example, the principal offence rule, which I find so interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And the principal offence rule basically is that a person might have committed a crime
[Amit Varma]: that can be bracketed under various different heads, but only the main one is taken and
[Amit Varma]: the rest are not taken, because the police feel it will give an impression that so many
[Amit Varma]: crimes were committed instead of just one. So for example, in the Nirbhaya case, you
[Amit Varma]: point out that the police, when they reported it, reported it as a murder, not as a rape.
[Amit Varma]: Everything else kind of, you know, kidnapping, rape, all of that just went out of the window.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what else is wrong with the way that, you know, crime statistics
[Amit Varma]: are recorded. And, you know, are people in positions of power who can change this? Are
[Amit Varma]: they aware of it? What do they do to change it? What's happening there?
[Guest]: So I think the focus that crime statistics began to get after 2012 was one, was unlike
[Guest]: anything that had ever happened before. And the processes and methodologies have not sort
[Guest]: of responded well enough to this increased focus. But it did sort of make us look at
[Guest]: things that we should have been looking at a long time ago. We should have been looking
[Guest]: at the fine print of all of this a long time ago. The very fact that this principal offence
[Guest]: rule was not mentioned in their limitations and disclaimers before the report begins until
[Guest]: I wrote about it. And they wrote, they were very angry and, you know, wanted the Hindu
[Guest]: to issue a clarification and saying, this is how we do it and there's nothing wrong
[Guest]: in it. But they had never thought to make it publicly known and they did do that subsequently.
[Guest]: And of course, the explanation in it is, that will artificially inflate the number of crimes,
[Guest]: to which my answer is cross tabs. I mean, the whole world's statistics functions on
[Guest]: cross tabs. That's not a good enough explanation. And the other thing is, we also should be,
[Guest]: you know, their complaint is the NCRB report already runs into hundreds of pages and not
[Guest]: everything needs to be a PDF report. So, you know, we have accepted that we have NCRB statistics
[Guest]: only on the subset of IPC sections that the NCRB has decided we need to have information
[Guest]: about. There's the whole universe of IPC sections that we don't have data about. What is, since
[Guest]: they collect it, what is stopping them from just putting out the information on their
[Guest]: website in Excel for someone to download if they want that extra information. So, that
[Guest]: too is something that, you know, it's a sort of constriction of the data that we should
[Guest]: not be accepting. And I think a lot of the ways in which the data is collected and put
[Guest]: out is something that has escaped scrutiny for too long. So, at some point, I think between
[Guest]: 2012 and 13, the NCRB decided to change the calculation of crimes against women, as crimes
[Guest]: against women as the numerator and the denominator being the whole population to the denominator
[Guest]: being women alone. And they did that with it only being in the fine print of like one
[Guest]: chart. So, if you were plotting it on a chart and you just plotted that number over time,
[Guest]: you'd see the sudden explosion and wonder what was going on without being told that
[Guest]: the denominator had been halved without any proper, you know, at least it merits a page
[Guest]: of explanation on why this happened. So, it's been opaque and impenetrable for very long.
[Guest]: It's bad, it's a bad sign that it continues like this, that we haven't built the public
[Guest]: pressure, the democratic pressure on the NCRB to get much better at what they do. I think
[Guest]: another problem with the NCRB is that people have these sort of pie in the sky wish lists
[Guest]: about what sort of data they'd like to get from the NCRB without the sort of basic acknowledgement
[Guest]: that the NCRB can only give you data on which, on crimes for which there is a clearly existing
[Guest]: IPC section. So, we can't expect to have data on lynchings, for example, because there
[Guest]: isn't a clearly defined IPC section for that alone, or on sort of communal violence
[Guest]: which everyone would like to track, but there's a bunch of different sections. Sometimes the
[Guest]: particular section on communal violence even is not the one used, it's sort of group
[Guest]: violence that's used. So, the NCRB can only tell you data, can only tell you about the
[Guest]: data that it does collect and it doesn't collect enough of it and doesn't collect
[Guest]: it well enough. I also think there's a broader issue about the way we do interstate
[Guest]: comparisons whether it is about crime or COVID, which is that we end up conflating a state's
[Guest]: ability to report numbers with a larger number of incidents in that state. So, year after
[Guest]: year there's often a headline that says, Kerala reports highest crimes against women
[Guest]: or sometimes it's Delhi and without the acknowledgement that other indicators show
[Guest]: that it's likely that women in these states feel more empowered to report crime and that
[Guest]: the administrative mechanism is more able and willing to record that crime. In the absence
[Guest]: of these variables that would complicate the issue, equating it simply to sort of a linear
[Guest]: and numerical thing of more in one and less in the other is a real problem. And I found
[Guest]: this the same in the case of COVID as well, which is this question of everyone asking
[Guest]: as if it was such a mystifying thing after the first wave, how come UP has had such few
[Guest]: cases and deaths while Kerala has had so many? And now that we know from excess mortality
[Guest]: numbers that UP missed a lot of COVID deaths, we should have sort of been asking the question
[Guest]: of why is UP doing such a poor job of registering numbers rather than how does UP magically
[Guest]: have such few numbers? And in the book I have a chart that looks at violence experienced
[Guest]: by women as against violence reported by women to the cops. And the experience of violence
[Guest]: comes from what women report to household surveyors, while the recording of it comes
[Guest]: from what they report to the police. And the quadrant that has high reported crime to the
[Guest]: police is the one that usually gets all of the media focus. While my sort of argument
[Guest]: is that the quadrant which has high experienced crime but low reported crime is the problematic
[Guest]: one and that's the one that ends up getting no media focus at all because that ends up
[Guest]: being the quadrant with low reported crime. So, you know, you would not compare numbers
[Guest]: in say London with Delhi on sexual violence because you would acknowledge that London
[Guest]: is closer to full registration and Delhi isn't. Then why we feel it's okay to compare states
[Guest]: in India which have, you know, sort of equally dramatic differences in their ratios of state
[Guest]: capacity empowerment. Why we feel like these sort of interstate comparisons are okay is
[Guest]: beyond me and what we are ending up doing is penalizing states that work better.
[Amit Varma]: There's a powerful sentence in your, towards the end of that chapter which really sums
[Amit Varma]: up a lot which I'll read out again before I, you know, double click on parts of it where
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, registration of crime is a culmination of multiple realities. The existence
[Amit Varma]: of a grievance, the empowerment of an individual to report it, the decisions behind the police
[Amit Varma]: choosing to register it and mechanisms for accountability. With the last three components
[Amit Varma]: so sorely lacking in most of India, it might at the very least be time to stop treating
[Amit Varma]: crime statistics as a spectator sport, stop quote. And obviously, it's a fair warning
[Amit Varma]: against people not to build narratives based on crime statistics alone because like you
[Amit Varma]: just pointed out in Kerala's case, it's so complicated. But again, some of the statistics
[Amit Varma]: here are very telling. Like for example, you know, you did a survey in Rajasthan or there
[Amit Varma]: was a survey in Rajasthan rather, where you point out that, quote, a large survey on crime
[Amit Varma]: in Rajasthan found that most crime victims never report their experience crime to the
[Amit Varma]: police. Only 29% of crime victim surveyed stated that they had visited a police station
[Amit Varma]: to report the crime. The biggest deterrent to reporting a crime was a victim's perception
[Amit Varma]: that the crime wasn't important enough, 28%. The next most significant deterrent was the
[Amit Varma]: belief that the police could not help, 20%, or did not want to help, 17%. Among those
[Amit Varma]: who attempted to report crimes, 17% were not able to register them. In an experiment conducted
[Amit Varma]: by the surveyors where they sent decoys to report crimes, the police were willing to
[Amit Varma]: register FIRs only 54% of the time. And, you know, similarly, you've pointed out this 2015
[Amit Varma]: survey in Mumbai in Delhi, where 13% of the household surveyed in Delhi and 15% in Mumbai
[Amit Varma]: experienced at least one of the seven crimes under study with theft being the most common.
[Amit Varma]: But only half of these were reported to the police and only half of those registered as
[Amit Varma]: FIRs, stop quote. And elsewhere, you also write about how there are parallel systems
[Amit Varma]: of crime reporting in countries like the UK, where, you know, there are crime victimization
[Amit Varma]: surveys along with the household level surveys that happen. So even if someone doesn't go
[Amit Varma]: to the cops to register a crime, there is a way of getting that data, getting a sense
[Amit Varma]: of what's really happening. So do you think that there is scope for something like that
[Amit Varma]: in India? Like on the one hand, you've spoken about how there needs to be massive amounts
[Amit Varma]: of advocacy and political, you know, will to solve the problem of just capturing all
[Amit Varma]: these crimes, reporting on these crimes, just making that kind of accurate. And the way
[Amit Varma]: my brain works is I sort of assume, you know, anyone who wants a state to function well,
[Amit Varma]: you know, please go ahead. It's a great job. Good luck with that. But I also keep thinking
[Amit Varma]: about how at a private level, we can fill these gaps and what can civil society do to
[Amit Varma]: get this data. And as you pointed out in places like the UK, it does happen. So what's your
[Amit Varma]: sense of, you know, just a holistic, like what can be done at the level of the state
[Amit Varma]: and how likely is it? And what can be done at the level of civil society, which maybe
[Amit Varma]: isn't being done yet, but maybe someone listens to this and says, hey, I want to put my money
[Amit Varma]: there and make it happen.
[Guest]: Yeah. And just, you know, to extend the point that you, you know, made about the ability
[Guest]: to report a crime and then how much of those get registered. I also want to repeat the
[Guest]: fact that I worry sometimes about the excessive focus on sexual crime alone and, you know,
[Guest]: at the cost of a broader understanding of the universe of crime. Because, for example,
[Guest]: in the same Rajasthan survey, they found that the undercount, you know, the likelihood of
[Guest]: not reporting was greatest for property crime. And in violent crimes, including sexual crimes,
[Guest]: you were, there were missed crimes, but you were more likely to report it to the police.
[Guest]: So if you ask someone about the issue of underreporting, they'll probably immediately point to something
[Guest]: like sexual crime and say that that's something that's not getting reported. How, and you
[Guest]: know, it is a problem. But it distorts our view of the broader landscape of crime, because
[Guest]: the underreporting of property crime is so much greater. So, you know, if you look at
[Guest]: only those numbers, you'll get a sense of sexual crime occupying a far larger share
[Guest]: than the, of the overall landscape of crime than it actually does. So, you know, that
[Guest]: is a real distortion to worry about. And, you know, some of these things, when you think
[Guest]: of are so intuitive. I spoke to Jacob Punnus, the former Director General of Police in Kerala.
[Guest]: And he just said something, which when he said it immediately made sense to me. He said,
[Guest]: one of the crimes that will have least underreporting will be motorcycle or car theft, because you
[Guest]: need an FIR to get insurance and, you know, for various things. And I also wondered if
[Guest]: one of the things that would have the most FIRs for would be ID card theft, because at
[Guest]: least when I worked in newsrooms, if you didn't have an FIR, you would not get a fresh ID
[Guest]: card and you could not swipe into your office. So all of us who had, you know, our purses
[Guest]: stolen in Delhi, we would go not for the money or whatever, but to get that ID card, because
[Amit Varma]: otherwise you wouldn't get a fresh ID card. Even for passports. In fact, I think that
[Amit Varma]: must be over reported, because even if you lose a passport, you have to file an FIR to
[Guest]: get a new one. So, right. So he said, you know, those are the crimes in which, like
[Guest]: if you're trying to understand what full registration looks like, those are the crimes that would
[Guest]: probably have full registration. And then, so his point was also that crimes like molestation,
[Guest]: which is something that is sort of endemically exists and endemically under reported, because
[Guest]: it is treated in this sort of matrix as one which, you know, either you don't take seriously
[Guest]: or the police are not going to take seriously also, because it's so common. So his point
[Guest]: was that if you see a significant increase in the reporting of murder in a city, then
[Guest]: you will feel that murder has increased substantially. However, if you see a significant increase
[Guest]: in the reporting of sexual molestation, then you should feel that the police has done a
[Guest]: good job of something, because this is an endemically under reported crime and an increase
[Guest]: in that could have a lot to do with better reporting. So, you know, the cops themselves
[Guest]: understand this universe much better and, you know, would, are far closer to understanding
[Guest]: real trends rather than what the data shows. There have been a few attempts at crime victimization
[Guest]: surveys in India, the little ones like the Rajasthan, Bombay, Delhi ones, but the IHDS,
[Guest]: which is a national representative survey, also has a question on the experience of crime.
[Guest]: As far as I know, it doesn't ask about sexual crime, so it only asks about things like theft.
[Guest]: So that is one sort of non-government source that you are likely to get of better reporting
[Guest]: of crime. There was talk at one point of the government itself conducting a crime victimization
[Guest]: survey, which I think has had a pandemic setback, but is likely to still happen at some point.
[Guest]: If we think about civil society initiatives to better, you know, to improve this, I think
[Guest]: one of the acknowledgements has to be in understanding who is less likely to report crime and who
[Guest]: is least likely to have their crime registered. And, you know, I haven't seen good evidence
[Guest]: of this, but if we, as I would imagine, systematically find that the poor are least likely to get
[Guest]: taken seriously, then that sort of gives a direction to efforts as well, right, which
[Guest]: is, there's no sort of great nobility in having the police commissioner's number on your cell
[Guest]: phone and, you know, being quite sure that you will have crimes registered easily, without
[Guest]: the acknowledgement that you are in any case most likely to be able to, and if you're not
[Guest]: doing it, it's probably just to save yourself the hassle of it.
[Guest]: My friend Smita Nair used to be a crime reporter at the Indian Express in Mumbai for a long
[Guest]: time and now works in, lives and works in Goa. She had an article that not just has
[Guest]: stayed with me, stayed with many people about a Mumbai cop who became deeply invested in
[Guest]: the issue of missing children and one missing child in particular, even including after
[Guest]: he retired and how that child, you know, became something he could not stop thinking about
[Guest]: the circumstances around it. And that sort of thing, because this issue of children going
[Guest]: missing is so much more a problem of the poor than of the rich. And, you know, I don't know
[Guest]: if there's civil society ways that will fix it or this sort of almost fanatically committed
[Guest]: cop who really made it like his life's mission to find that girl. So yeah, I suppose an acknowledgement
[Guest]: of who is suffering the most and then how to help them would be the best way to go about
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you spoke about kidnappings. I'm reminded of this story. I was told just a couple of
[Amit Varma]: days back by my friend Mohit Satyanand, who's also been on the show. And he spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how the child of someone was kidnapped, one of the Delhi elites. And the guy got in touch
[Amit Varma]: with Mohit because Mohit is a friend, Mohit knew the police commissioner or somebody very
[Amit Varma]: high up made a phone call. The police commissioner then personally got in touch with the parent
[Amit Varma]: whose child had been kidnapped and said, don't worry about it. This is going to be a straightforward
[Amit Varma]: case. And they got the kid back in 24 hours. And what Mohit then found out was that in
[Amit Varma]: a particular slum, he got some data which showed that 500 kids had gone missing within
[Amit Varma]: the last year or couple of years or whatever, I forget the time period and never found.
[Amit Varma]: None of those cases was obviously, you know, sorted out by the cops, because hey, no connections,
[Amit Varma]: you can't call up the commissioner. And many of those kids were actually kidnapped for
[Amit Varma]: things like ritual sacrifice, because somebody was ill and they believed sacrificing a kid
[Amit Varma]: would help them. They were kidnapped for kidneys, and so on and so forth. It's quite horrific.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to go down that road. But it tells you just the absence of law and order.
[Amit Varma]: And it also tells you something, you know, at the heart of, you know, one of these stats
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned was about how people will a certain percentage of people will not report
[Amit Varma]: something because they don't think the cops will do anything. And given that the rule
[Amit Varma]: of law really doesn't exist for most of the country. I'm not surprised at that. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: short of a really serious crime, even I would not bother to report anything, you know, unless
[Amit Varma]: I lost my passport, which I'd have to report. But, you know, that's kind of worrying. Let's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we are still in your first chapter, and we've almost touched three hours. So let's
[Amit Varma]: go to your second chapter. So second chapter is titled what India thinks, feels and believes.
[Amit Varma]: And again, a lot of this is some stuff that people in this in our English speaking bubbles
[Amit Varma]: might not understand is true to the extent that it is. And your core finding is this
[Amit Varma]: quote, at its core, India is conservative, even fundamentalist, if there is going to
[Amit Varma]: be change, it will take work, stop quote. And you've given a number of illustrations
[Amit Varma]: of different aspects of this. For example, you point out that Indians care about civil
[Amit Varma]: rights even less than Pakistani respondents do. You know, Indian respondents express greater
[Amit Varma]: support for a strong leader and for army rule than most other countries and the global average.
[Amit Varma]: Indians think a strong leader is good for the country, more so than even people in Russia
[Amit Varma]: who like strong leaders and have a strong leader. And Indians mistrust NGOs, they don't
[Amit Varma]: they mistrust the role of the opposition. They don't care about a fair judiciary. They
[Amit Varma]: don't care about honest elections. You know, they believe that the political elites are
[Amit Varma]: out of touch. But having said that, they also are quote, among the most satisfied in the
[Amit Varma]: world with how democracy in their country was working. Stop quote, there is almost this
[Amit Varma]: religion of government as I say. More worryingly speaking to current concerns of the polarization
[Amit Varma]: on in our society, you point out quote, a study of four Indian states Gujarat, Haryana,
[Amit Varma]: Karnataka and Odisha found that two thirds of respondents felt that the state should
[Amit Varma]: punish those who do not say Bharat Mata Ki Jai, a nationalistic slogan that Muslims say
[Amit Varma]: militates against the religious beliefs in public functions, and those who do not stand
[Amit Varma]: for the national anthem, stop quote. And you know, Indians also tend to be against free
[Amit Varma]: expression 75% are for majoritarian nationalism, you know, and and you write quote, Hindus
[Amit Varma]: in particular tended to see the religious identity and Indian national identity as closely
[Amit Varma]: intertwined. Nearly two thirds of Hindus that 64% said it is very important to be Hindu
[Amit Varma]: to be truly Indian. And you know, this kind of goes on and on. And so, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: looking at this, do you think that this is something that's actually if anything, become
[Amit Varma]: worse in recent times, like one of the things that you do point out with data is that young
[Amit Varma]: people are not more progressive, as you would imagine, one of my sort of theories on why
[Amit Varma]: our politics at least has become so polarized and is driven to the extremes comes from,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what the sociologist Timur Kuran in his 1999 book, Public Lies, Private Truths,
[Amit Varma]: calls preference falsification, where back in the day, there were certain things you
[Amit Varma]: just didn't say in public because it felt beyond the pale. But what social media has
[Amit Varma]: done is led to what Quran would call a preference cascade, where you suddenly discover other
[Amit Varma]: people who are taking those positions, that this is a country for Hindus only or whatever
[Amit Varma]: the case might be, across a set of different issues, and you feel emboldened to say that,
[Amit Varma]: and to double down on it. And when you do that, it makes everybody's beliefs stronger.
[Amit Varma]: So I might believe 10 things, right? I might believe that jobs are important, or I might
[Amit Varma]: believe that I want my kids to have a better future. But I might also believe that Muslims
[Amit Varma]: are the other or that a woman's place is in her kitchen. And those aspects of my identity,
[Amit Varma]: sort of get emphasised and encouraged by what's happening in social media. Alongside me like
[Amit Varma]: Cass Sunstein talks about this thing called group polarisation, where studies showed that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he put a bunch of Democrats and Republicans in a room with, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: Democrats in one room, Republicans in one room, and found that the average view of the
[Amit Varma]: group had shifted towards something that was more extreme than the most extreme member
[Amit Varma]: of the group thought before they met. So when you're together in a group, you drift towards
[Amit Varma]: the extremes. In fact, this, you know, this recent gathering of Yati Narsin Anand and
[Amit Varma]: all these, all these so called holy men who were effectively calling for a genocide of
[Amit Varma]: Muslims, which is very recent when we are speaking, but will be a few weeks in the past
[Amit Varma]: when the episode is released, is also an example of that where one of the reasons they are
[Amit Varma]: going out and saying more and more extreme things is they're also competing with each
[Amit Varma]: other for attention. And how do you compete with attention within a political party or
[Amit Varma]: a gathering or whatever? You don't do it by being moderate and reasonable. You do it by
[Amit Varma]: being more extreme than the next guy, more pure than the next guy. And all of that is
[Amit Varma]: happening. And that would lead me to think that there are therefore two contradictory
[Amit Varma]: impulses at play. And one impulse would be that, listen, the world is getting globalised.
[Amit Varma]: Young people today are seeing everything on the internet, liberal views from across the
[Amit Varma]: world, all kinds of evidence that the other is not really the other, you know, everyone
[Amit Varma]: shares a human condition. But at the same time, there is also this trend happening in
[Amit Varma]: our society where everything is getting polarised, where you know, the better angels of our nature
[Amit Varma]: in a sense are getting suppressed. And these tribalistic toxic aspects are coming out.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of this? You know, is there a change towards a good direction like
[Amit Varma]: you write at the beginning of the chapter that it's very conservative, and it's going
[Amit Varma]: to take a lot for that to change that doesn't really seem hopeful. But on other margins,
[Amit Varma]: you point out that there is scope for hope. For example, we're getting married older and
[Amit Varma]: older, which is a good thing. You haven't mentioned it in this book. But I think our
[Amit Varma]: rising divorce rate is also fantastic. It speaks to the empowerment of women and the
[Amit Varma]: fact that they have more choices. Similarly, you talk about same sex marriages, how approaches
[Amit Varma]: to that have certainly become more progressive. Like I remember if you know, had 377 been
[Amit Varma]: outlawed in the 1980s, people would have reacted in a different way. I'm confident of that.
[Amit Varma]: And yet here it was like nobody condemned the repeal of 377. Many people such as us
[Amit Varma]: were welcomed it obviously, but nobody really protested it. It was like a done deal, which
[Amit Varma]: to me was a sign of how at least on one margin, Indian society is getting more progressive.
[Amit Varma]: But overall, I look at the data and especially the data when it comes to age, and I get the
[Amit Varma]: sense that one should not necessarily be too optimistic that things like youth and education
[Amit Varma]: and urbanization don't always correlate with more liberal attitudes. What's your sense
[Guest]: of all this? Yes, I think what we're seeing right now is whatever the things that we assume
[Guest]: would be automatic forces that lead to more progressive attitudes are not going to operate
[Guest]: that way in India. And if we continue to believe that those will be the pathways to more progressive
[Guest]: attitudes, we're not going to get anywhere. So we're going to have to come up with a new
[Guest]: sort of political science vocabulary to figure out how these changes will occur, if we can
[Guest]: even get to the consensus that these are changes we want to take place. I think the findings
[Guest]: that neither youth nor education nor urbanization are necessarily, are not in fact preconditions
[Guest]: for more progressive values is important. And then thinking hard about the changes,
[Guest]: the norms setting, whether political or social that it's going to take for the needle to
[Guest]: shift in these sorts of ways is going to become important to think of. But one of the things
[Guest]: I would disagree with you is that I don't think that it's social media which is what
[Guest]: has emboldened people. I do agree that people are emboldened, but I think the backing of
[Guest]: a muscularly majoritarian state is what has emboldened people. When you see that essentially
[Guest]: your views are the views that are being espoused by the government and being enacted in violent
[Guest]: means on the streets, then that is your tribe. You found your community and it is the government.
[Guest]: That's what people are feeling. So I also disagree that people are sort of forced to
[Guest]: compete with each other in being more hateful because you need to stand out. I think it's
[Guest]: more a sort of party to the top, which is that this is a broadly accepted thing and
[Guest]: then you can run with it and get as genocidal as you want because there's going to be no
[Guest]: repercussions. And I don't think there's any element of artifice in the, again, because
[Guest]: that would again be sort of ascribing fringe or sort of manipulative or politically manipulative
[Guest]: intentions to people who essentially do believe these things, I think, and are now feeling
[Guest]: emboldened with good reason, facing no state response, to be able to say these things.
[Guest]: So there is a lot to think about in terms of what we're going to be able to think, what
[Guest]: the sort of future direction in change in this is. And honestly, I can't see it in the
[Guest]: immediate future because I don't see any norm setting at the, forget at the political level
[Guest]: because this is the government and this is, it has broad support and it's likely going
[Guest]: to continue to have the support for some time. But I can't see really an existence apart
[Guest]: from really sort of tiny groups in Delhi or in Bombay, for example, of any sort of mass
[Guest]: social mobilization around broad support for religious tolerance, for example. Even just
[Guest]: the fact that Hindu-Muslim unity, now just the phrase has such a sort of quaint ring
[Guest]: to it because I think this is something that in the post-Babri era really was a sort of
[Guest]: project of the Indian liberal and there were street movements, there were media movements,
[Guest]: it really was a project then. It's now, if anything, that is now a sort of quaint fringe,
[Guest]: which is, it's an Instagram handle, it's a street plate, it's not taken on the position
[Guest]: of a large social movement. So, I don't know, I don't know what it is, whether it is some
[Guest]: sort of embarrassment about really owning this. I don't even feel that I see a sort
[Guest]: of universal acceptance among liberals that sort of this muscular and violent majoritarianism
[Guest]: and anti-Muslim sentiment is as widespread as it is. I think it's sort of sometimes
[Guest]: equated into becoming very intolerant. These people, they're also misogynists, they're
[Guest]: also anti-caste, they're also anti-Muslim, but I feel the centrality of anti-Muslim sentiment
[Guest]: to all of this is not as clearly acknowledged as it needs to be. And when you talk about
[Guest]: things that, if you take it in the opposite direction, not things that you now feel emboldened
[Guest]: to say, but rather if you start talking about things that you now no longer feel that it's
[Guest]: okay to say. I do think, as we spoke earlier, I do think that some amount of sexist stuff
[Guest]: is not okay to say in the broad public sphere. And while I do see a lot of casteist beliefs
[Guest]: espoused in both in what people say as well as, and a lot of it on social media, any sort
[Guest]: of active Dalit person, particularly women, faces terrible casteism in the responses that
[Guest]: they routinely get. But I feel like there is at least some pushback to that in the sort
[Guest]: of unconnected group of people. So all of this sort of brings me back to the feeling
[Guest]: that the centrality of anti-Muslim sentiment to the current moment is not something that's
[Guest]: adequately accepted. And you realize this when you speak to young Muslims, which is
[Guest]: even a well-off, avowedly apolitical young Muslim cannot exist on social media without
[Guest]: encountering abuse. And you shouldn't have to be avowedly apolitical. You should be able
[Guest]: to be as political as you want and still not have to face that abuse. And just how endemic
[Guest]: it is, everyone will say, yes, it exists. But how central it is to this current moment
[Guest]: is not something that I feel is adequately talked about. And pathways to the future,
[Guest]: I mean, there's one way is to think about whether making it not okay to say these things
[Guest]: is the first step towards it. And then you can think about how that might happen. But
[Guest]: I have a lot of faith in the power of political norm-setting. And so, of course, it worries
[Guest]: me then that the ghettoization of Muslim politicians and the sort of pushing to the fringe of Muslim
[Guest]: politicians means that even that sort of political norm-setting will be difficult. And then espousing
[Guest]: again this quote-unquote Hindu-Muslim unity sentiment is a lonely enterprise for politicians
[Guest]: then. But I place a lot of faith in that because I do feel that I've seen it in conversations
[Guest]: with politicians and in data on the role that affirmative action for Dalit politicians and
[Guest]: then the sort of act of seeing them in power, the impact that this has had on norm-setting
[Guest]: in at least in their constituencies. But if you've reached a point, as we have right now,
[Guest]: that a Muslim cannot get elected in this country except in a Muslim majority constituency,
[Guest]: where are we going from here? Because there's absolutely no conversation and we can almost
[Guest]: sort of throw it out of the discussion of having affirmative action around political
[Guest]: representation for Muslims. That is as far from the national discourse right now as is
[Guest]: possible. So, if that's not going to happen, then you have to be a politician who really
[Guest]: goes out on a limb to espouse something that may not have broader political dividend. And
[Guest]: I can't think of too many people who do that. And so, yeah, I can't see immediate pathways
[Amit Varma]: out of it. Yeah, I mean, at one point you do right, quote,
[Amit Varma]: but for lasting change, the hard work of rewiring values will come from politics and the creation
[Amit Varma]: of social norms, stop quote. But all the data is, you know, extremely grim and very clear
[Amit Varma]: about what kind of country we are and what direction we are moving in, which makes me
[Amit Varma]: wonder like, if I'm wrong in one of the assertions that I make, like I have constantly been bemoaning
[Amit Varma]: the way in which opposition parties also quote the Hindutva vote, like Aam Aadmi Party, of
[Amit Varma]: course, does it in various ways and free pilgrimages and so much religious posturing that they
[Amit Varma]: do. Even the Congress does so much soft Hindutva. You know, when the Babri Masjid judgment came,
[Amit Varma]: Priyanka Gandhi boasted, it was my father who threw open the gates and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone is quoting that vote. And my sense was that this shows a lack of imagination,
[Amit Varma]: that there is an assumption they have made that this nature of, you know, the Indian
[Amit Varma]: people is non negotiable. This is what it is, you have to cater to it. And you fight
[Amit Varma]: for issues on the margins. And my sense is that no, my sense is voters contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And there might be someone who hates Muslims, but he might also want better jobs for his
[Amit Varma]: kids. He might also want more economic prosperity for himself. So you want to appeal to the
[Amit Varma]: better angels of the nature as it were, you want to use more political imagination and
[Amit Varma]: find out ways of making this particular thing a little irrelevant and speak to those aspects
[Amit Varma]: of this. But looking at all the data in your chapter, I get the sense that that might be
[Amit Varma]: a fool's errand, that maybe it is just too idealistic. And that maybe all these parties
[Amit Varma]: kinda have given up on all of that. And they just know that this is what it is, this is
[Amit Varma]: an easy thing to do. And I believe one, no one can out Hindutva the BJP. And I also believe
[Amit Varma]: that even the BJP can't ride this tiger, you know, that it is going to lead to horrific
[Amit Varma]: consequences. And none of this what, you know, Yati Narsinanand, I've been watching his videos
[Amit Varma]: for months, I've gone down right wing rabbit holes in just shock and horror to see what's
[Amit Varma]: happening out there. And for those people, not just Modi, not just Amit Shah, even Adityanath
[Amit Varma]: is too moderate. They're not doing enough for Hindus, they want to do far worse. And
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of where it's headed to a point where I think it'll, you know, it keeps getting
[Amit Varma]: more and more extreme and splintering further till it collapses under its own weight. That
[Amit Varma]: is a hope. So do you think there is that possibility that if other politicians showed more political
[Amit Varma]: imagination, that we could sidestep this issue? Or do you feel that we are inevitably going
[Guest]: where we are going? So it's hard to think of what comes first in these, right? And I
[Guest]: do agree that voters contain multitudes. But the weaponization of one part of their beliefs
[Guest]: into what they should believe is the most important one. And in fact, the sort of conversion
[Guest]: of that one belief into somehow being at the core of all of their other beliefs is something
[Guest]: that the Hindu right has done very successfully. So if you convince people that everything
[Guest]: from population to the economy is to be laid at the door of Muslims, and if you've done
[Guest]: it really successfully by among other things, also taking control of the media, then you're
[Guest]: sort of flattening those multitudes. There are, you know, from places where we seem to
[Guest]: be not in exactly this binary, I suppose there are questions to ask about how that has happened
[Guest]: and what it means and what sort of fault lines exist there then, which is when you think
[Guest]: about Kerala and Tamil Nadu, for example, which do not have precisely these fault lines
[Guest]: in the same way at least. So there is something to think about. Of course, it meant that a
[Guest]: hundred years ago, these movements began a hundred years ago in these states. So it's
[Guest]: a depressing thought to think that if we begin something now, maybe in a hundred years, this
[Guest]: fault line will be less significant in those states. Maybe there is, you know, a social
[Guest]: science experiment we had in someone attempting this leap of political imagination and bringing
[Guest]: back to the core economic concerns and the economy and jobs and see if they're able to,
[Guest]: if they're able to be, you know, decent people with a convincing story and a convincing message
[Guest]: and if they're able to get past this, because we haven't had that attempt. It's not that
[Guest]: someone's attempted it and failed. We've just not had that attempt of.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, I'd say we saw an example of it just a decade ago, which was a whole India
[Amit Varma]: against corruption thing where corruption kind of became the locus. And obviously, as
[Amit Varma]: I wrote at the time, the way Hazare and KHD Wal and all went about it was completely wrong
[Amit Varma]: and Jan Lokpal was not going to solve the problem where the problem essentially was
[Amit Varma]: too much power and discretion in the hands of the state. But for that moment, corruption
[Amit Varma]: became the big issue. So, you know, and of course, the moment shifted and other things
[Guest]: and this whole agenda took over. I find it hard to agree with that because
[Guest]: that would assume that what India against corruption said was its core concern was truly
[Guest]: only its core concern and that it would have been and that it believed sort of the sort
[Guest]: of egalitarian sentiment about everything else was true to it. Now, given how all of
[Guest]: the products of that movement have turned out to be majoritarian to one degree or the
[Guest]: other, authoritarian to one degree or the other, I find it hard now in hindsight, I don't think
[Guest]: I felt moved by them then either. And, you know, in Maharashtra, we know Anna Hazare
[Guest]: more than the rest of the country knew him then. So I find it hard to think of the India
[Guest]: against corruption as a movement that was purely about corruption.
[Amit Varma]: My point there is that I agree with you about these people. And even I wrote at the time
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, these are false messiahs and don't get taken in. And I was skeptical of
[Amit Varma]: KHD Wal from right then. But I think in a lot of the popular imagination, the anger
[Amit Varma]: against corruption, forget the intent of the leaders of the movement, I think in the eyes
[Amit Varma]: of a lot of people, corruption was a big issue. And you could galvanize around that. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that certainly was one of the factors which helped the BJP come to power. And of
[Amit Varma]: course, when they came to power, they did what they did. They went off in one particular
[Amit Varma]: direction. But otherwise, you know, I think it was a bit of a factor.
[Guest]: But the question to be asked is, could anyone have galvanized around corruption? Or is there
[Guest]: a reason that the people who did do it, who did turn out to be authoritarian and majoritarian,
[Guest]: were the people who were successful in galvanizing around it? I cannot find myself sort of, I'm
[Guest]: not able to feel confident enough in the pure anti-corruption feelings of people at that
[Guest]: time to feel that if a bunch of young Muslim men had similarly come up with a movement
[Guest]: or a bunch of Dalit activists from universities, that it would have had the same uptake. I
[Guest]: think there is a reason that these people leading these movements galvanized people
[Guest]: around this issue, when you are convinced at the back of your mind that the other issues
[Guest]: are taken care of. These guys are not going to start talking about Hindu-Muslim stuff
[Guest]: in the future, you know. So, I find it hard to think of it as pure galvanization around
[Guest]: corruption, even if the people who were galvanized around it then felt that that was what they
[Amit Varma]: were rallying around. Fair enough. I mean, I know many people who
[Amit Varma]: galvanized for them and are completely against Hindutva today. So, I think regardless of
[Amit Varma]: what the intentions of the leaders were, I think many of the people who felt moved by
[Amit Varma]: that moment were not necessarily motivated by, you know, what eventually transpired.
[Guest]: Right. But I think the reason that it's important to talk about the movement as a whole and
[Guest]: to think about why some succeed and why others don't, is to think about why those succeeded.
[Guest]: So while individuals might not have been there for Hindutvavadi reasons, the next step of
[Guest]: thinking around it is why that particular movement around corruption, with some people
[Guest]: who later turned out to be Hindutvavadi, despite being supported by people who were not Hindutvavadi,
[Amit Varma]: was the one that succeeded. Let's talk about sort of your third chapter
[Amit Varma]: and we'll go through the different themes really briefly because I know you have to
[Amit Varma]: go back home. And your third chapter is about, it's called How India Really Votes. And the
[Amit Varma]: broad point you make there, of course, is our simple narratives are wrong and you begin
[Amit Varma]: with a story of the 2015 Bihar elections where, you know, you have all these experts on TV
[Amit Varma]: and people are saying X won and they're all giving gyan about why X won and then suddenly
[Amit Varma]: the narrative changes. Actually Y has won and they start giving gyan around why Y has
[Amit Varma]: won. And there's this great book by Philip Tetlock called Super Forecasting. You must
[Guest]: have read it. No, I haven't. Fantastic book. Yeah. It's a very profound book for various
[Amit Varma]: other reasons and I particularly loved its focus on the importance of probabilistic thinking
[Amit Varma]: and avoiding certainties. But one of the themes that it does look at is how the so-called
[Amit Varma]: TV experts often get everything wrong because they are supposed to, you know, go out there
[Amit Varma]: on TV and be pundits and, you know, be full of certainties because that's why they're
[Amit Varma]: there. If you're going to start giving percentages that, you know, I think it is 33% likely that
[Amit Varma]: blah blah blah and start putting nuance everywhere, you're going to get nowhere. And he speaks
[Amit Varma]: of these forecasting tournaments where inevitably the experts do the worst. And the people who
[Amit Varma]: do the best are just people who are generally intelligent, but most importantly, skeptical,
[Amit Varma]: who are open to changing their mind. And by the way, for my listeners, a great book on
[Amit Varma]: the theme of changing your mind and being open is the book I just finished reading called
[Amit Varma]: Think Again by Adam Grant. So just pick that up. And that's kind of what super forecasting
[Amit Varma]: is about. And in your chapter, you bust sort of a bunch of myths, you point out something
[Amit Varma]: that I remember, you know, I used to blog about more than a decade and a half ago that
[Amit Varma]: people would talk about a wave, that there is a wave and this has happened. And I was
[Amit Varma]: like, there is, you know, no such thing as a wave ever. Narratives are always complicated.
[Amit Varma]: They are not simple. Now, as you point out that, you know, many of these narratives are
[Amit Varma]: wrong, people are not voting just for money, you know, X group of people just because they
[Amit Varma]: are X group of people are not necessarily a vote bank. But one of the interesting things
[Amit Varma]: that I noticed and wanted to ask you about is how female voter turnout has exploded.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in our most recent parliamentary election, female voter turnout was higher
[Amit Varma]: than male turnout for the first time in history, I think is grown by 75%, while male turnout
[Amit Varma]: has grown by 50%. And something very real has changed. So what do you think are kind
[Amit Varma]: of the factors for that? And you've, of course, been at pains to point out that they're not
[Amit Varma]: voting in a homogenous way. Being a woman is just part of the many multitudes they contain,
[Amit Varma]: right? So you could be voting for your particular tribe or for, you know, an MP of your caste,
[Amit Varma]: because you feel you look after your interests, or blah, blah, blah, you could have various
[Amit Varma]: reasons. But what is it now that so many women are turning out to vote? And is there maybe
[Amit Varma]: a little bit of hope there? Because this is a country where women have been treated as
[Amit Varma]: second class citizens all the way throughout. And it's a deeply misogynist country. And
[Amit Varma]: at some point, you know, you think that even if they're not voting in homogenous ways,
[Amit Varma]: they could take that into account, there is maybe scope for new kinds of political narrative
[Guest]: there. What's what's your sense of all this? So I think one of the things is that the Election
[Guest]: Commission really has done a very sort of good and purposeful job around taking more
[Guest]: women onto the electoral rolls, first of all, which was, you know, an issue you you weren't
[Guest]: registered on the rolls at all. And then sort of doing things to encourage women to vote.
[Guest]: I think the fact that political violence during elections has significantly declined, has
[Guest]: helped women come, you know, be more confident about coming out to vote. I think there's
[Guest]: also some amount of, you know, there's a certain sort of adorable sincerity in government messaging
[Guest]: sometimes. So I and that does get somewhere, you know, the thing that's the the slogan
[Guest]: that's painted on the government school does get followed pretty sincerely on some things
[Guest]: at least. So I think that that conveying the sincerity of go out, vote, it's important
[Guest]: that that's got through and that has been very systematically in a decentralised and
[Guest]: apolitical way sort of pushed across the board. There's really no constituency that pushes
[Guest]: back against anyone voting at all, you know, that that doesn't happen. But I think it's
[Guest]: also important to think about who doesn't get to vote. And a large, the largest sort
[Guest]: of explanation of that is migrant working men. So the fact that sort of short term especially
[Guest]: migrants are not women, means that they are less likely to miss voting day. And while
[Guest]: I think it's an important story and sort of has the potential to be very transformative,
[Guest]: I do also think that we need to pay attention to the fact that male voter, we're not, we're
[Guest]: in November and you're 100%. So it's not that we can be satisfied. I think we need to think
[Guest]: hard about how to improve male voter turnout as well. And again, one of these sort of tired
[Guest]: narratives that a lot of newspapers do around election day is that, oh, you know, South
[Guest]: Bombay didn't turn out to vote or South Delhi didn't turn out to vote, which really misses
[Guest]: the broader point, which is that those who miss voting are primarily migrant men or those
[Guest]: who have shifted residence and found themselves fall off the rolls. So yeah, there's scope
[Guest]: to do better research on why, you know, women turn out in such large numbers now. And also
[Guest]: definitely reason to worry about why we've not been able to push male turnout further.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another sort of belief of mine, which you challenged and made me think about
[Amit Varma]: in this is how most political parties are effectively the same in my view, they're left
[Amit Varma]: of center on economics, right of center on social issues. And, you know, broadly statism
[Amit Varma]: is the dominant political ideology. Now, you've pointed out here, I'll read out a couple of
[Amit Varma]: quotes from you, where at one point, you say, quote, most parties do promise development,
[Amit Varma]: but despite the common refrain that they're all the same, the key political antagonists
[Amit Varma]: in India are ideologically distinct, particularly on religion, and voters know clearly where
[Amit Varma]: to align themselves, stop quote. And later on, you talk about how the economic axis has
[Amit Varma]: become less important, where you write, since the 1990s, however, this axis has become less
[Amit Varma]: salient to India's voters, with economic distinctions between political parties diminishing,
[Amit Varma]: and religious distinctions, sharpening, stop quote. So a couple of questions. One is that
[Amit Varma]: I buy that people vote for parties for drastically different reasons. So they're different in
[Amit Varma]: their appeal, they're different at the local level. But in macro outcomes, where you look
[Amit Varma]: overall, they seem pretty similar to me in this, like even Modi, you know, I keep saying
[Amit Varma]: that he got his whole love for central planning from Nehru and his whole authoritarian streak
[Amit Varma]: from Indira, there's not much difference. If there is one difference, it comes from
[Amit Varma]: Arun Shourie's formulation, that NDA is UPA plus cow. And it seems to me that the whole
[Amit Varma]: of the difference today is cow. And even people like Aam Aadmi Party and the Congress sometimes
[Amit Varma]: with their soft Hindutva are trying to bridge that gap and trying to incorporate more cow.
[Guest]: So you know, what would be your sort of So I think there's probably a sort of historical
[Guest]: break that we'll have to in the future account for, because this has not been the trend of
[Guest]: the last, you know, of the post-independence years. And, you know, part of my thinking
[Guest]: around this comes from a book by Pradeep Chibber and Rahul Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Rahul's been on my show a couple of times, yeah.
[Guest]: And Identity and Ideology. And they, you know, make the point around about the sort of continued
[Guest]: conviction of voters over time around political beliefs and how that sort of, sorry, you know,
[Guest]: broader social beliefs and how that aligns with the parties that they vote for. And it's
[Guest]: distinct and also something that I feel is borne out in sort of conversations and what
[Guest]: I see around me. And I think on the economic front, in particular, there has been much
[Guest]: more movement in the last 20 years, which is, it doesn't seem like it right now, but
[Guest]: there was a point at which there was a sort of active opposition to reservations along
[Guest]: the economic right. And that this, the rule of a less active state was a sort of political
[Guest]: point along, around the right. I agree that that is, you know, less central to right-wing
[Guest]: political parties now. I don't agree that the two parties are broadly similar along
[Guest]: all economic policies. For example, you know, I don't want to get into it at length, but
[Guest]: I don't believe that what happened on labor laws, for example, would happen under a Congress
[Guest]: government. I don't think, I do think that that is, you know, there were sort of directions
[Guest]: like that, but this sort of mass loosening, I don't think would have happened. I think
[Guest]: there's other, you know, more recent economic decisions as well that only could have happened
[Guest]: against under this government. And I think the sort of expansion in the parts of the
[Guest]: welfare state that happened under the UPA, while they have sort of other resonances in
[Guest]: the current government, that I do see distinctions in economic terms between the two as well.
[Guest]: Of course, they are not sort of, it's not a Democrat or Republican in that respect.
[Guest]: And I find this Congress plus cow sort of diminishing of just how majoritarian the BJP
[Guest]: is to an unfair degree, because, you know, it's not sort of empirically testable right
[Guest]: now. But I can't, I don't think that this is precisely the situation that would have
[Guest]: happened under a current Congress-UPA government. I do think that there was a, there was large
[Guest]: sort of public frustration with slowing economic growth and a sort of culture of frustration,
[Guest]: and a frustration about what was seen as a culture of corruption. And those sort of economic
[Guest]: issues did play a role in the 2014 election. There's a, there's a lot that the Congress
[Guest]: needs to be criticized for in terms of it's soft and not even soft Hindutva often. But
[Guest]: I think Congress plus cow is a bit of a diminishment of the issue.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, I mean, just to briefly push back before, before we move on. Firstly, I think,
[Amit Varma]: I think at different phases of time, parties have shown liberalizing instincts like the
[Amit Varma]: Congress in 91 under Manmohan, which I'd put, which had rank as a very similar government
[Amit Varma]: to Vajpayee, where both of them had strong liberalizing instincts and did a lot of good.
[Amit Varma]: And completely at odds with that is say what Modi is doing now. And, you know, Modi made
[Amit Varma]: noises about minimum government, maximum governance. But the fact of the matter is, he quite obviously
[Amit Varma]: never believed in it, because he never implemented anything to that effect, either in Gujarat
[Amit Varma]: or at the national level. And I mean, it took them seven years to sell Air India. So my
[Amit Varma]: sense would be that there was a little bit of posturing, but there was never a genuine
[Amit Varma]: ideological difference in that, that the dominant economic ideology going by the actions of
[Amit Varma]: our parties has always been statism, with the notable and honorable exceptions of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Narsimha Rao and Manmohan at the moment of liberalization, and then later on, with
[Amit Varma]: some of the things that Vajpayee did. But otherwise, the dominant move has been that
[Amit Varma]: we in economics is statism. And there are a lot of other things happening at sort of
[Amit Varma]: the social level, like you spoke about them being anti-reservation. But if you actually
[Amit Varma]: look at how they won 2014, by actually just using caste, you've also written about it
[Amit Varma]: in your book that they recognize that in UP, they need to appeal to non-Jatav Dalits and
[Amit Varma]: non-Yadav OBCs, and similarly in Maharashtra to non-Maratha OBCs. And I mean, they were
[Amit Varma]: playing caste as skillfully as any other party ever did. So on that margin, also, I don't
[Guest]: think that they were particularly different. Yes, my argument is not at all that the current
[Guest]: BJP is anti-reservation. I definitely do not think that that's the case. It's more that
[Guest]: the, in fact, my point was that we've forgotten that there was a time that there was an economic
[Guest]: right that was anti-reservation, and that was one of the axes that separated left and
[Guest]: right-wing beliefs. And that sort of coalescing around left-wing economic views as well, along
[Guest]: what was the right as well, has happened. So I, in fact, disagree that Rahul's and Pradeep
[Guest]: Chhabra's analysis of reservation being one of the axes that separate the left and the
[Guest]: right, I disagree about that. I don't feel that there exists an anti-reservation constituency
[Guest]: in government, at least, although there is a lot of talk about that. And in fact, I mean,
[Guest]: what exists now is a sort of trying to keep, trying to sort of satisfy majoritarianism
[Guest]: as well as these hard caste calculations, as well as use the language of reservation.
[Guest]: So I think the economically weaker section reservation is one of the sort of examples
[Guest]: of how the right tries to do reservation, you know, and it's, I think it's a real travesty.
[Amit Varma]: There might have been many debates around reservations and op-ed pages, but in terms
[Amit Varma]: of what political parties actually did when they're in power, I don't think there's any
[Amit Varma]: significant difference in any of them. It was just a question of thinking how they can
[Amit Varma]: use different caste calculuses, if there is such a word as calculuses, different caste
[Amit Varma]: calculus. Calculus should be plural, right? So to kind of figure it out, but anyway, that's
[Guest]: it. Just to add that the 10%, the economically weaker section reservation attacks the heart
[Guest]: of, and I should put it out there that I'm a strong proponent of reservation, it attacks
[Guest]: the heart of the purpose and the ethos and the sort of intended outcomes of reservation,
[Guest]: which is, and it has absolutely no basis in data. And if at that moment, when it was being
[Guest]: offered or put into law, if anybody had actually looked at the data and looked at who was the
[Guest]: most deserving for affirmative action, it would have been the Muslims of this country.
[Guest]: So the instrumentalization of that reservation, which is essentially an upper caste reservation
[Guest]: by another name, is a break from, that's the point at which I disagree that everybody has
[Guest]: just done reservation the same way. That particular piece of legislation is a break from how reservation
[Guest]: has been done so far and is a uniquely right-wing problem.
[Amit Varma]: Sure, fair enough. Data, again, being something that, as you point out, more people should
[Amit Varma]: look at. So, you know, we have like just, you know, not much time to go, 10 minutes
[Amit Varma]: before you have to sort of leave. So to sum up some of the big themes of your book, and
[Amit Varma]: I think all listeners should read the entire book with great attention, because every chapter
[Amit Varma]: has great insights. One of the things that struck me is that, one, we are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the most religious countries in the world. 84% of Indians say that religion is
[Amit Varma]: very important in their lives, which, as you point out, makes us more religious than, quote,
[Amit Varma]: Western Europe, Central and Eastern Europe, Israel, Latin America, and the United States.
[Amit Varma]: Only in sub-Saharan Africa and some regions with large Muslim populations with similar
[Amit Varma]: or higher shares of the public say religion is important to them. And as you point out,
[Amit Varma]: 97% of people believe in God. You know, are there, I should, I'm one of the smallest minority,
[Amit Varma]: I'm part of one of the smallest minorities, clearly. You also point out that young people
[Amit Varma]: are religious. You say, quote, young people are quite religious too. About 78% of respondents
[Amit Varma]: in a youth survey reported praying quite often. 68% said they went to a religious place of
[Amit Varma]: worship frequently. 49% reported watching religious shows on television quite often.
[Amit Varma]: And 46% often engaged in activities such as singing religious songs, bhajans or taking
[Amit Varma]: part in satsang, stop quote. And, you know, 46% keep fast and 39% read a religious book
[Amit Varma]: quite often. All of which, when I read them, seemed to me to be far greater than I would
[Amit Varma]: have imagined. Perhaps I have too much of an optimistic view of the youth. Yeah, you
[Amit Varma]: also talk about how much money do Indians make. And again, I think the big insight,
[Amit Varma]: which should be pretty standard by now, but isn't, is that people like you and me are
[Amit Varma]: really in the top 0.1% of the country, if anything. You know, so many people call themselves
[Guest]: middle class. And I feel like laughing. So one reason, people who are like, you know,
[Guest]: push back against the 1%. Sure, push back against the 1%, but you're the 0.01%. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: exactly. It's just not the middle classes, you know, even your domestic help is perhaps
[Amit Varma]: too rich to be in the middle classes. It's really that kind of scene. So again, for people
[Amit Varma]: who haven't really thought about this, your chapter is in Ayopana. You speak about how
[Amit Varma]: we make our money, how we spend our money, how we work, how we are growing and aging,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, I had a rant about how, you know, referring back to Modi's little rant
[Amit Varma]: on population, where he said, we need to control our population. Throughout our freaking history,
[Amit Varma]: politicians have been ascribing problems, failures of governance to the people, where
[Amit Varma]: they are saying governance is not the problem, the people are the problem, you are the problem,
[Amit Varma]: which is basically what they're telling citizens. And you quoted Paul Ehrlich and his nauseating
[Amit Varma]: book Population Bomb. And of course, he had a famous bet with Julian Simon, which he lost
[Amit Varma]: I'll link details to that from the show notes. But I am totally of the school that believes
[Amit Varma]: with Julian Simon, as the title of his book goes, that human beings are the ultimate resource,
[Amit Varma]: we are brains and not stomachs. Our population has always been our greatest strength. That
[Amit Varma]: is why people move from villages to cities, though, as you point out, not in the rate
[Amit Varma]: people think they are, but they move from villages to cities. And another of the great
[Amit Varma]: sort of insights in your book, which I first heard from Chinmay Tumbe, when I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with him on migration, is a large chunk of migration in India happens because women get
[Amit Varma]: married and they leave one home to go to another home. And again, a great TIL moment for me
[Amit Varma]: is that much of the migration in India is rural to rural migration, not rural to urban
[Amit Varma]: migration. And it's coming from the women who are leaving one home to go to another
[Amit Varma]: home. And again, you make some great points about urbanization on how it's happening,
[Amit Varma]: but not as fast as people imagine and challenge some of my beliefs there as well. And there
[Amit Varma]: is just done in your book, as you can see, I'm very excited about it, but we don't have
[Amit Varma]: enough time because you did not commit eight hours to me. So kindly come prepared next
[Amit Varma]: time. And in your conclusion, when we talk about, you know, fixing the problems, you
[Amit Varma]: write, quote, the only way to fix the problems is to accurately identify the flaws and talk
[Amit Varma]: to experts about how to fix them. A vague, overly broad skepticism and suspicion about
[Amit Varma]: all official data and all inconvenient private data will not help. It will only strengthen
[Amit Varma]: the arm of those who seek to suppress it. And you also talk about how ideology is a
[Amit Varma]: problem. We are so bound by ideology that each side refuses to engage with the other
[Amit Varma]: side. And to get out of it, you say quote, we are going to have to dig deep and get specific
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And those words dig deep and get specific are important to me because I think
[Amit Varma]: that people, especially elites like us, we cultivate this approach of abstract skepticism
[Amit Varma]: and just dismiss all of these efforts that are happening. And the abstract skepticism
[Amit Varma]: beyond the point is not helpful. Concrete action is needed. What can we do? What can
[Amit Varma]: we do to get our hands dirty and make things a little better? And
[Guest]: I can just jump in there because I've been talking about the book to groups. The number
[Guest]: one question I get asked at the end of it is how can we believe any data when all of
[Guest]: it seems to be manipulated or made up? And you know, when the media is so taken over
[Guest]: and and my point is that all of that we know about what went wrong or was suppressed in
[Guest]: the data came out through good journalism in the last couple of years. And the reason
[Guest]: that we know and you know, we know specific issues about specific surveys or data sets
[Guest]: that had specific problems for specific reasons. So I will be completely sort of skeptical
[Guest]: or suspicious about a data set when I know why. I mean, when we have had people able
[Guest]: to be whistleblowers and speak out about it and also have reporting around it, I don't
[Guest]: then feel the need to worry about the fact that there could be sort of mass manipulation
[Guest]: of fudging going on unknown. Of course, it means that we need to be more vigilant for
[Guest]: the future and we should not assume that there will never be a sort of greater manipulation.
[Guest]: But this is the thing. I mean, and I have some I find it a bit intellectually lazy for
[Guest]: people to say that, you know, data can't be believed, all of it is being fudged. It just
[Guest]: means that you've not paid enough attention to the people who are speaking out about it.
[Guest]: And you've not engaged hard enough to figure out what in it is questionable, without just
[Guest]: being sort of over broadened in criticism about it.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll add to that and make a point which you also make in your book in different words
[Amit Varma]: is that I think to a lot of things that the state does, Hanlon's razor applies and Hanlon's
[Amit Varma]: razor is never attribute to malice what can be adequately explained by stupidity, or in
[Amit Varma]: this case, incompetence that there are many things within our data gathering system which
[Amit Varma]: don't work, it's deeply complex, but it's not necessarily because of malice or bad intent
[Amit Varma]: or someone's trying to push a narrative. It's just incompetent shit is hard, people are
[Amit Varma]: trying to figure it out. You know, I described demonetization also really to Hanlon's razor
[Amit Varma]: stupidity rather than malice. Some people might feel that I'm being too generous. And
[Amit Varma]: the heuristic that I kind of use like this is something that I face also, right? During
[Amit Varma]: the pandemic, who do I trust? There's so much stuff going around. And I think the process
[Amit Varma]: I worked for myself to figure out what to trust and what not to trust is figured out
[Amit Varma]: a few people I considered trustworthy, whether it's Eric Topol or the journalist Zainab Tufekci
[Amit Varma]: or within India, people like Brahmar Mukherjee and Gautam Menon and all of that. And after
[Amit Varma]: a certain point in time, you figure out, okay, I'm going to trust these guys, and you're
[Amit Varma]: still skeptical, but you broadly trust these guys. And similarly, I think, when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to data, people can trust stuff that comes from you or Pramit, for example, I mean, that
[Amit Varma]: would be my heuristic that if I'm, you know, what you write, and what Pramit would write
[Amit Varma]: would carry a certain amount of credibility, because I know that there's a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of rigor that has gotten and journalists earn that credibility over time. And, and I think
[Amit Varma]: it's, it's so important that people like you are also kind of working in this field and
[Amit Varma]: doing this work. I mean, I, people often argue about Thomas Carlyle's great man theory of
[Amit Varma]: history. And you know, where the argument is that history doesn't need great men, or
[Amit Varma]: in the formulation of those days, great men or women would be what we would probably say
[Amit Varma]: today. But, and the currents of history go their own way. And I'm not sure I agree with
[Amit Varma]: that. I think if you or Pramit didn't exist, I think our landscape would be a lot poorer
[Amit Varma]: if a handful of people didn't exist. So I just hope that people listening to this who
[Amit Varma]: are interested in this field can be inspired by you and kind of, you know, take this journey
[Amit Varma]: forward. But before I embarrass you too much, and you just walk off and leave.
[Guest]: And Amit, if I can just jump in with two things. One is that I do agree that there is a lot
[Guest]: of incompetence. However, there have been some notable instances of malice in the last
[Guest]: couple of years. And it's particularly important to pay attention to those, so that we don't
[Guest]: paint the sort of broad history of Indian data with the same brush. Because the breaks
[Guest]: in continuity that have happened in the last two years, are sort of historic breaks. And
[Guest]: I've said this before that, you know, I think every generation feels about a few things.
[Guest]: How did we let this happen on our watch? And as a data journalist, I feel about two things
[Guest]: that happened in 2019. How did we let this happen on our watch, which is that for the
[Guest]: first time in Indian history, a National Statistical Survey report was completely ready. And then
[Guest]: the government officially said that they were not going to release it, although many of
[Guest]: us already have it. And we know that it showed sort of historically, you know, an enormous
[Guest]: slowdown in growth to the point that it would have led to, it would have shown a decline
[Guest]: in real incomes, and the first increase in poverty in decades.
[Amit Varma]: And this was pre-COVID.
[Guest]: This was pre-COVID. And journalists by the name Somesh Jha from Business Standard brought
[Guest]: this out. We all know this is what the data said. It was cleared by the government's own
[Guest]: National Statistical Commission. So it wasn't that it lacked, you know, rigor. And for the
[Guest]: first time in Indian history, under all of our watch, the government has been able to
[Guest]: just say that they're not going to release a report that we know showed them in a bad
[Guest]: light and nothing has happened. There's no repercussions. They've been allowed to go
[Guest]: ahead with it.
[Guest]: So there has been a lot of historic incompetence, but there is some fresh malice. And I want
[Guest]: to make a point about trusting people like Pramit in particular. So I don't necessarily
[Guest]: subscribe to both sides-ism and everyone should criticize everyone. But I think one of the
[Guest]: reasons someone like Pramit has the credibility that he does is that an important piece of
[Guest]: journalism he did in the last couple of years was pointing out the flaws in the GDP calculation.
[Guest]: And in his writing around it, he has pointed out sort of historic failings of the national
[Guest]: statistical architecture, past mistakes. So when you do see that, that a critical eye
[Guest]: is being turned on the whole sort of scope of history and not being, you know, only switched
[Guest]: on at this moment in time, that helps build credibility too. Because, you know, hopefully
[Guest]: we will all outlast governments. But if our reporting stays on and people can see whether
[Guest]: that critical lens is only being turned on for one government or the other.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and my point about data was that at least the data there which came out was reliable.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the government not bringing it out is obviously a malicious act. And there is
[Amit Varma]: much malice we can accuse him of. I mean, malice and stupidity kind of go together.
[Amit Varma]: And there is so much malice that we have to be glad that they are stupid also, because
[Amit Varma]: otherwise the consequences could be even worse. But that's a different matter. So to wind
[Amit Varma]: up a couple of questions. And one question is that, if you look forward to India in 2032,
[Amit Varma]: 10 years from now, what's the best case scenario? And what's the worst case scenario in your
[Amit Varma]: eyes? And I'm asking it in a broader sense, not just a sense of data journalism or data
[Amit Varma]: gathering or whatever, but you know, you can give whatever, you know, you can highlight
[Guest]: whatever aspects you want to your answer.
[Guest]: So I would suppose, you know, the worst case scenario is that the bubbles that we are building
[Guest]: around ourselves, which are not just sort of problematic in that they don't advance
[Guest]: knowledge, but also end up, as you were pointing out, sometimes, you know, amplifying the worst
[Guest]: parts of our lives and the sort of biggest gaps in our knowledge get worse. And because
[Guest]: this is something I'm seeing, you know, much more of this effect of, you know, there's
[Guest]: not talking to each other situation. If that got a lot worse, that's a worst case scenario.
[Guest]: And the worsening of the current Islamophobia in the country would be the worst case scenario.
[Guest]: I suppose the best case scenario would be that movements, both political and social,
[Guest]: were able to build broad social norms around equity, equality, egalitarianism, tolerance,
[Guest]: those sorts of, you know, those sorts of movements that have had their moments in the past and
[Guest]: that don't seem like something that can't happen, but that some of them came together
[Guest]: in a sort of critical mass around public declarations of commitments to equality took off. On the
[Guest]: data side, a sort of greater commitment to fairness in approach and analysis of data
[Guest]: is what I would hope for. So yeah, those are my best and worst case scenarios.
[Amit Varma]: Great. So my last question is this, and of course, one more worst case scenario is that
[Amit Varma]: by then, seen unseen episodes will go on for 15 hours, and you'll be one of my guests and
[Amit Varma]: we can talk for 15 hours as we discuss your 8th book or such like. But so final question.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I like to ask my guests to recommend books for my listeners to and for me to read
[Amit Varma]: and discover and not necessarily books on data or statistics alone, because I don't
[Amit Varma]: want to pigeonhole you, but any books, what books have had the greatest influence on who
[Amit Varma]: you are, or have changed the way you look at the world, or you've been so entertained
[Amit Varma]: by that you just want to shout and say, hey, you know, look at this, read this.
[Amit Varma]: We've talked before about Raag Darbari and I think that is one of the books that's had
[Amit Varma]: the most impact on me. Did I ask you the question in my last episode? I've completely forgotten.
[Guest]: Not about books, but I talked about it anyway, because I love this book. It's a lovely book.
[Guest]: I have also really, really in the last couple of years, loved Shobhan Chaudhary's The Competent
[Guest]: Authority. In some ways, it felt like a modern and futuristic Raag Darbari, you know, in
[Guest]: all of its sort of understandings of the levers of Indian democracy, as well as the, I mean,
[Guest]: it was all absurd, but not so absurd that it seemed impossible. And I loved it. Trying
[Guest]: to think of what else I would recommend. In the last year, I have really enjoyed Despite
[Guest]: the State by my friend Raj Shekhar. He and I disagree about many things too, but you
[Guest]: know, it's a great book. And just for, you know, engagement and fun, I would recommend
[Guest]: a book that I recently started reading, which all of Tamil Nadu will roll their eyes at
[Guest]: because they've all read it as children, which is a book, you know, an epic called Ponni
[Guest]: and Selvan. So sometimes you realize you just want to sort of lose yourself in a world of
[Guest]: character. So either the book or the English audio retelling that, you know, lose yourself
[Guest]: in an epic.
[Amit Varma]: Well, thanks so much for that. And thank you for coming on the show. It's been such a,
[Amit Varma]: I've had fun having this conversation.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up Whole Numbers and Half Truths by Rukmini S. You can follow Rukmini
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter at Rukmini. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse
[Amit Varma]: past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.